Contribution of Alcohol- and Cigarette-Related Cues to Concurrent Reinforcer Choice in Humans
Drug-related cues have been extensively studied for their contributions to decision-making processes involving drug consumption. Less studied is how drug-related stimuli may impact decisions involving outcomes not directly related to substance use. Studies using concurrent choice tasks have demonstrated that cocaine and cannabis cues result in robust and selective biases for monetary reinforcers contiguous with those cues. The purpose of this study was to provide a conceptual replication of these findings with alcohol and cigarettes. Participants recruited using crowdsourcing completed a cued concurrent choice task involving presentation of two cues (one drug and one neutral) followed by concurrent monetary offers below each image. Alcohol (Experiment 1; N=103) and cigarette (Experiment 2; N=256) visual cues were evaluated. Participants with hazardous alcohol use and current cigarette use showed greater-than-indifference selection for the alcohol- (p=.004) and cigarette-cued (p=.02) monetary choices, respectively. Qualitative responses indicated that the most popular rationale for responding was “image quality” despite images having no explicit impact on the reinforcer received. Low alcohol use (p=.03) and non-cigarette using controls (p<.001) showed an avoidance bias with lower-than-indifference selection for drug-cued choices. These findings replicate and extend observations that spatially contiguous drug-related cues can bias decisions involving concurrently presented non-drug reinforcers.
Introduction
Drug-related cues are thought to play a key role in the development, maintenance, and persistence of substance use disorder. The importance of such cues is emphasized among theoretical accounts in addiction science, which often consider cue associations central to addictive behaviors. For example, incentive salience approaches argue that the sensitization of neurobehavioral pathways related to salience and motivation following repeated substance exposure results in a transfer of incentive salience to accompanying stimuli through associative pairings with drug-taking events. Cue-related incentive salience and cue reactivity have subsequently been shown to contribute to clinically relevant outcomes such as state-dependent changes in drug valuation following cue exposure (e.g.,) and relapse to substance use following a period of abstinence (e.g.,). Understanding the contributions of drug-related stimuli in decision-making can provide meaningful insight into a basic theoretical understanding of substance use disorder as well as applied information to help inform clinical intervention development.
Research on the impact of drug-related cues for decision-making has historically focused on the influence of cue exposure on measures related to substance use such as drug craving. These studies have reliably demonstrated that drug-associated stimuli can increase drug craving, and to a lesser extent, physiological responses (e.g., heart rate) (see meta-analysis by). Other work has shown that direct selections for drug-related stimuli are associated with use frequency and severity measures for alcohol, cigarettes, cocaine, and opioids (; see review by). Preference for drug-related stimuli over non-drug ones is also related to prospectively collected substance use, including more frequent cocaine use in treatment-seeking participants and more severe non-medical opioid use among those at low-risk during baseline testing.
Less studied in this context is how drug-related cues may impact decision-making between non-drug reinforcers made during events outside of drug-taking episodes. Conceptually, drug cues that are spatially and temporally contiguous with drug reinforcement develop salient associations with drug valuation. It is expected that when these stimuli are presented spatially contiguous with other decision-making events that they could bias choices towards those response options even when the reinforcer available is not the previously paired outcome (in this case a drug reinforcer). Practically and clinically, such choices are at play for persons reporting substance use when decision-making events occurs outside a drug-taking context or episode, but when drug-related imagery is still present. Under these contexts, competing reinforcer choices may involve drug-related cues even when explicit reinforcement from the delivery of a drug is not available. For example, an individual at a party could meet two potential “romantic partners”, one who is wearing imagery related to substance use (e.g., a tattoo of a cigarette or shirt with brewery logo) and one who only has neutral imagery (e.g., a gray shirt). The presence of these cues may bias decision-making given the decision-maker’s behavioral history involving those cues even though there is no explicit consequence for these decisions regarding substance use itself. This albeit simplified vignette is an example of situations in which these kinds of concurrent decisions may occur. Clinically, shifted decision-making resulting from the presence of drug-related stimuli could help explain a cascade of decisions in substance use disorder that involve engaging in high-risk activities and negative consequences that were otherwise considered disadvantageous without the addition of a discriminative cue for drug reinforcement (e.g., a decision for sexual activity with a higher risk sexual partner).
Recent studies from our research group have tested these cue-based decisions using a cued concurrent choice task involving choices between concurrently presented non-drug reinforcers (see Figure 1 for schematic of this task). This task is intended to provide a laboratory model of decision-making in the context of drug-cues when the consequences are outcomes other than a drug commodity. Money is used as a quantifiable, standardized, and relatively universal consequence for the purpose of this laboratory model. Participants are asked to complete a series of concurrent choices during which monetary outcomes are presented contiguous with visual drug or matched neutral cues. Decisions made for a drug-paired monetary reinforcer on trials in which the reinforcer is equal are taken to represent a measure of bias for non-drug outcomes that are presented contemporaneous with drug cues. Evaluating decisions on a standardized and matching scale (i.e., standard denomination money) is notable as it allows for the study of potentially maladaptive decision-making promoted by these cues, the magnitude of which can be quantified on that primary reinforcer scale. To date, studies in participants reporting cocaine and cannabis use have found a significant and robust bias for outcomes contiguous with drug cues that is selective to individuals with that particular substance use history, specific to trials involving drug cues, and positively associated with an individual’s substance use frequency and severity.
The current series of experiments were designed to extend this work by evaluating alcohol (Experiment 1) and cigarette (Experiment 2) cues using a similar concurrent choice procedure. These experiments were designed as conceptual replications of this prior work that could determine if, and how, prior results with illicit substances may extend to substances more widely available on a legal market. On the one hand, the wider availability of these substances means that use can occur without market-related interruptions (e.g., dealer “dry spells” in illicit markets) providing for more frequent and consistent opportunities for drug-related stimuli to develop an associative pairing with drug valuation. On the other hand, this wider availability also means that these cues are more present in everyday life, which may come to diminish the specificity of developed associations. This study also collected qualitative responses regarding the decision-making process to both help characterize the mechanisms contributing to concurrent choices and help determine if individual differences in these rationales contribute to differences in drug-associated choice biases. We predicted that a significant drug-cue choice bias would be observed for both alcohol and cigarette cues that was related to substance use history and use variables consistent with prior work.
Experiment 1 Methods
Screening
Participants were sampled using the crowdsourcing resource Amazon Mechanical Turk (mTurk) from May to June 2016. mTurk is an online platform that allows for the effective and efficient recruitment of research participants for psychology and addiction-related research. Potential participants had to first complete a study screener to verify inclusion/exclusion eligibility. Access to this screener was limited to individuals with at least 100 prior mTurk tasks completed, a 95% or higher approval rate on these tasks, and current United States residence. These initial criteria were used consistent with prior research and recommendations to help improve data quality. The study screener included information about demographics and general health history. Participants had to be 18 years of age or older to participant. Sampling also proceeded such that approximately half of participants sampled were recruited with no inclusion criteria related to alcohol use and approximately half of participants sampled with the restriction of reporting 4 or more standard alcohol drinks consumed per week. This over-recruitment of alcohol use was used to ensure necessary variability in alcohol use behaviors to evaluate associations with task performance. A heterogeneous alcohol use sample was collected rather sampling a more distinct contrast (e.g., no alcohol use versus alcohol use disorder) in order to match the relative ubiquity of alcohol consumption in the general public. Qualifying participants read an informed consent cover letter prior to participation and the host university Institutional Review Board approved the protocol for all experiments reported in this manuscript.
Cued Concurrent Choice Task.
The impact of alcohol-related cues on monetary choices was evaluated using a cued concurrent choice task previously applied in cocaine and cannabis research, as described in the Introduction. This task involved a series of trials in which concurrent choice for two monetary values (e.g., $0.25 versus $0.10) were evaluated. Concurrent choices were immediately preceded by two visual stimuli presented side-by-side on the screen. Alcohol trials presented an image that was alcohol-related (e.g., beer can) with a matched neutral, non-alcohol image (e.g., soda can). Images in Experiment 1 and 2 were all proximal cues (i.e., did not contain people or scenes) and were matched on the number of objects in the image, size, and color scheme. Neutral trials presented two images that were unrelated to alcohol or alcohol-related paraphernalia (e.g., lamps; desk chairs).
All trials began with the presentation of a fixation point for 1000 ms in the screen center. The two visual stimuli then replaced the fixation point and were presented for 2000 ms. A monetary value then appeared below each image with the participants provided 2000 ms to select the monetary reinforcer they wanted to receive. The total task consisted of 10 practice trials followed by 72 experimental trials (48 alcohol trials and 24 neutral filler trials). Monetary values for concurrent choice were selected from common United States denominations ($0.05, $0.10, and $0.25).1 The location of alcohol and neutral images as well as trial type was randomized. Equal value trials in which the monetary reinforcers spatially congruent with the images were equal in value were considered critical trials and oversampled as half of all trials (i.e., 24 trials total). Participants were instructed to respond carefully because study payments would be randomly selected from an unspecified number of trials (“Respond carefully because some money amounts that you choose will be randomly selected and added as a bonus at the end of the study”). In actuality, all participants received $1.50 to provide standardized payments reflecting the expected time of completion for the full survey these data were collected in. The primary outcome was percent choices for alcohol-cued values (alcohol-cued/[alcohol-cued + paired neutral-cued choices] * 100). Primary analyses focused on trials in which the two values were equal (i.e., critical trials). Secondary analyses assessed trials with differing monetary values to evaluate disadvantageous responding. Side bias was evaluated on the neutral filler trials as percent choices for left-cued monetary values.
Free-Response Reasoning for Responses
Following completion of the cued-choice task, participants were asked to indicate the rationale behind responding using a free-text response. Specifically, individuals were asked “How did you make your decision when the values were equal?” Responses on this item were then coded by both authors and categorized into one of three thematic categories: 1) responses based on the hedonic quality of the image (“[I selected] which product I preferred or was more appealing”), 2) responses based on an instinct or gut response (“I went with gut instinct/snap judgement”), and 3) mixed or other reasons (e.g., picked a particular side, picked the last response selected; “I usually selected the one on the left”). This information was collected after completion of the task to avoid impacting task responding.
Demographics and Substance Use History
Participants also completed a battery of questions and questionnaires to assess demographics, alcohol use, and substance use history following completion of the cued-choice task. Demographic variables included age, gender, race, income, and education. Alcohol use variables included questions about quantity and frequency of drinking (e.g., drinks per week) and the Alcohol Use Disorder Identification Test (AUDIT). The AUDIT was analyzed as a total score of all ten items as well as a dichotomous cut-off of 8 or more for hazardous drinking and as the quantity-frequency subscale, the AUDIT-C, based on the first three items.
Behavioral Economic Demand
Behavioral economic demand was evaluated for alcohol and soda using commodity purchase tasks. A standard instructional vignette was provided in which participants were instructed they could not stockpile or get the commodity from another source, that they would have to consume all purchases in a single day, and that no commodity was available from prior days. Commodities available were one standard US drink or one 12 oz. serving of preferred brand soda. Consumption was evaluated across 15 monetary increments consisting of $0.00 [free], $0.01, $0.05, $0.13, $0.25, $0.50, $1, $2, $3, $4, $5, $6, $11, $35, and $140/unit. Curves were also evaluated for systematic data prior to analysis using standardized criteria. Exclusion for all zero consumption (n = 21 alcohol curves and 29 soda curves) and non-svstematic data (n = 6 alcohol curves and 5 soda curves) resulted in 76 analyzed alcohol and 69 analyzed soda curves.
Data from commodity purchase tasks were analyzed using the exponentiated demand equation:  where Q = consumption; Q0 = derived demand intensity; k = a constant related to consumption range (a priori set to 2); C = commodity price; and α = derived demand elasticity. Demand intensity was analyzed as the equation derived value reflecting consumption of a commodity at a unit price of zero. Demand elasticity reflects the sensitivity of consumption to changes in price. Analyses focused on demand intensity and demand elasticity given research showing these measures reflect a two-factor structure underlying purchase task data (e.g.,). Intensity and elasticity were log-transformed to achieve normality.
Data Analysis
One hundred and twenty-five participants completed the full study. Data were first evaluated for non-systematic or non-attentive responding. Checks included: 1) comparisons of age and gender at two points across the survey, 2) an item that instructed participants to select a particular response, 3) recall of a single digit number presented earlier in the survey that participants were instructed to remember, and 4) an item that asked if participants had been attentive and that their data should be used. Seventeen participants were removed for failing one or more of these explicit or implicit checks. An additional five participants were removed for failing to respond on more than 80% of task trials indicative of either computer failure or inattention. This resulted in a final analyzed sample of 103 participants.
The association between percent alcohol-cued choice on critical trials (i.e., trials in which the values were equal) and demographic and alcohol use variables was first conducted using bivariate Pearson correlations. Follow-up one-sample f-tests compared choices on critical trials to indifference (50%) by AUDIT diagnostic category (0–7 low alcohol risk versus 8+ alcohol risk). Side bias was evaluated on neutral filler trials as percent left-side choice. Median reaction times on critical trials were compared by Group and Trial Type using mixed factor ANOVA. Qualitative responses were first summarized using descriptive statistics. Differences in cued-choice responding by qualitative responses were then analyzed using multiple regression models included qualitative response theme as a categorical variable (other/mixed as the reference category). These differences were analyzed by the total sample and for differences by alcohol use groupings (as measured by the AUDIT cut-scores). R Statistical Analysis was used for analyses and inferential tests were two tailed with an alpha rate of .05. Data and code to reproduce these analyses is available at https://osf.io/da5qf/?viewonly=9a366f3826694ae5b4ca1690022c19d0.
Experiment 1 Results
Sample Characteristics
Demographic and substance use information for Experiment 1 are presented in Table 1 in the total sample (for demographics split by AUDIT history see Supplemental Table 1). Participants were, on average, 35 years old with a majority male (53.4%), white (71.8%), and college-educated (64.1%). Participants reported drinking an average of 6.8 standard drinks per week with approximately a third meeting criteria for risky drinking according to the AUDIT.
Alcohol-Cued Choice
Figure 2 displays percent choice for the alcohol-cued monetary values across all trials displayed by AUDIT cut-scores (8+ versus 0 to 7). A large effect size differences were observed by these diagnostic groups with significantly greater alcohol-cued choice in the risky drinking group on equal value trials (i.e., critical trials), t101 = 3.40, p < .001, d = 0.75. Comparisons at equal value trials indicated that the risky drinking group showed, on average, greater choices for the alcohol-cued monetary values than expected for indifference, t35 = 3.04, p = .004, d = 0.51. In contrast, the non-risky group had a small effect size selection against alcohol-cued monetary values away from indifference, t66 = 2.21, p = .03, d = 0.27. These differences were selective to equal value trials with no differences at other price differences (i.e., when values were not equal on the two sides), p values > .23. Similarly, no significant differences were observed in side selection on equal value trials by AUDIT group, t101 = 1.55, p = .12, d = 0.31, nor significant differences from chance responding in either group, p values > .10.
Table 1 contains bivariate associations between alcohol-cued choice bias on equal value trials and demographic, alcohol, and other substance use variables in the total sample (see Supplemental Table 1 for correlations split by group). Alcohol-cued choice bias was significantly associated with more standard alcohol drinks per week and higher AUDIT scores. These effects appeared largely driven by the quantity-frequency items on the AUDIT given the more robust associations involving the AUDIT-C subscale. Specifically, a multiple regression model including AUDIT-C scores and total scores of the other 7-items of the AUDIT indicated that the AUDIT-C accounted for the association, AUDIT-C: b = 0.03, p < .001, Other AUDIT Items: b = 0.007 p = .52. Greater alcohol demand intensity, but not soda demand, was significantly related to greater choice bias.
Cigarette use was not significantly associated with alcohol-cue choices. Greater soda drinks per week among persons reporting soda use was associated with lower alcohol-cued choice bias.
Response Times
Median response times by AUDIT group and trial type are presented in Figure 3. There was no significant main effect of AUDIT category, F1,101 = 0.12, p = .73, main effect of trial type, F1,101 = 0.90, p = .34, or interaction, F1,101 < 0.01, p = .97, for response times.
Rationale for Cued-Choice
Coding of qualitative responses indicated that approximately half (45.6%) of participants reported responding based on the quality of the image, a third (30.1%) reported responding based on instinct, and a quarter (24.3%) reported other reasons. Multiple regression models indicated no significant effect of rationale in the total sample, p values > .70. Interactions with AUDIT scores coded dichotomously (AUDIT 8+ versus AUDIT < 8) or continuously indicated a significant interaction with the image rationale, p values < .02. Follow-up tests indicated that for persons in the hazardous drinking group (AUDIT 8+), a significant effect of reporting responding based on image quality was observed with higher bias scores for those individuals, b = 0.17, β = .54, p = .004. No significant effect of responding based on image quality was observed in the AUDIT < 8 group, b = −0.05, β = −.13, p = .43.
Interim Summary and Discussion
Participants reporting more hazardous alcohol use showed a greater-than-chance bias towards selecting alcohol-cued monetary values. This choice bias was largely associated with the frequency of alcohol consumption given the reported significant relationships relevant to alcohol drinks per week and AUDIT-C scores. These findings are largely consistent with results observed for cocaine and cannabis insofar as participants in those studies with the relevant drug use history showed a bias that was selective to drug-related trials (i.e., no between-group differences were observed for side selection observed in the neutral trials).
Experiment 1 extended the results of these prior studies by collecting qualitative information regarding self-reported rationales for patterns of response. Coding and analysis of these responses indicated that most participants reported responding based on the quality and content of the image presented (e.g., “[I chose] whichever was more appealing”). These rationales were associated with response patterns such that participants who scored higher on the AUDIT displayed a higher bias score if they described responding based on this image rationale. Prior research has identified differing motives for drinking generally divided into “reward” and “relief” craving (which can be behaviorally defined as a positive versus negative reinforcement mechanisms). This body of work has found that these patterns of drinking are differentially associated with patterns of alcohol use with drinking driven by positive reinforcement broadly related to quantity of drinking and drinking driven by negative reinforcement broadly related to consequences of drinking (e.g.,). Although we did not evaluate these distinct subtypes of drinking, per se, the reported findings show a similar correspondence between behavioral responses for reinforcers related to the hedonic qualities of alcohol-related imagery and alcohol use frequency. These findings build on this work by showing that this response pattern based on a positive reinforcement mechanism may extend to other non-drug reinforcer selections. Future studies including explicit measures of drinking for reward versus relief, however, would be needed to reproduce this effect with these distinct phenotypes to verify this hypothesis.
Experiment 1 replicated prior work on cued concurrent choice by demonstrating a similar response bias for alcohol-associated choices among persons reporting alcohol use. Experiment uses a similar experimental design to test cued concurrent choices involving contiguously presented cigarettes stimuli. Participants reporting daily cigarette use and controls with no recent cigarette use were recruited to complete Experiment 2. Cigarette use history (grouping), quantity, and severity as well as qualitative responding were then explored as factors related to concurrent choice task performance as in Experiment 1.
Experiment 2 Methods
Procedures for Experiment 2 were generally identical to Experiment 1 with the exception of details described below. Inclusion/exclusion criteria for Experiment 2 were 1)18 years of age or older and 2) daily tobacco cigarette use [cigarette use group] OR no cigarette use in the past 2 months [control group]. Individuals in the control group were allowed to report a history of cigarette use outside of the past 3 months and this information was recorded for analysis purposes. These groupings were selected given the clear and well-defined categories of smokers versus non-smokers and relevance of these distinctions for the general population. Groups were sampled such that approximately half were in the cigarette use group and half in the control group. Qualifying participants completed a similar cued concurrent choice task as in Experiment 1 with the only difference being that cigarette trials (i.e., cigarette-related and matched neutral cues) were used in lieu of alcohol trials. Participants in the cigarette use group also completed the Fagerstrom Test of Nicotine Dependence. Behavioral economic demand tasks evaluated cigarette and chocolate demand (; Jacobs and Bickel 1999). Cigarettes were operationalized as single preferred brand cigarettes and chocolate was operationalized as one Hershev’s Kisses® chocolate piece (or equivalent size chocolate candy). Only participants in the smoker group completed the cigarette purchase task and only a subset of all participants completed the chocolate purchase task (N = 126 in the second wave of data collection, see below). Exclusion for all zero consumption (n = 2 cigarette curves and 9 chocolate curves) and non-systematic data (n = 17 cigarette curves and 7 chocolate curves) resulted in 102 analyzed cigarette and 110 analyzed chocolate curves.
A programming error resulted in participants in an initial wave of data collection (N = 130 with systematic data) completing a cued concurrent choice task for which trial order was not randomized. An additional wave of data collection was conducted following identification of this error with participants in that second wave completing a fully randomized task as in Experiment 1 (N = 126 with systematic data). Sensitivity tests indicated that randomization did not significantly impact the direction or significance of primary findings (i.e., the effect of smoking status on cigarette-cued choice did not differ when controlling for randomization order or including an interaction term with randomization order). Therefore, we present results combined from both groups for improved power and estimate precision.
Two hundred and ninety-seven participants completed the full study. Data were first evaluated for non-systematic or non-attentive responding using the attention checks described for Experiment 1. Twenty-eight participants were removed for failing one or more of these explicit or implicit checks. An additional 13 participants were removed for failing to respond on more than 80% of task trials indicative of either computer failure or inattention. This resulted in a final analyzed sample of 256 participants.
Experiment 2 Results
Sample Characteristics
Demographic and substance information for Experiment 2 by smoking group are presented in Table 2. Between-group comparisons indicated that participants reporting tobacco cigarette use were less likely to have a college education, OR = 0.51, p = .01, reported a lower income, t254 = 2.79, p = .005, d = 0.35, and more likely to report past week e-cigarette use, OR = 4.79, p < .001.
Cigarette-Cued Choice
Figure 4 displays percent choice for the cigarette-cued monetary values across all trials displayed by cigarette use group. A large effect size differences were observed with significantly greater cigarette-cued choice in the cigarette use group on equal value trials (i.e., critical trials), t254 = 8.93, p < .001, d = 1.11. Comparisons at equal value trials indicated that the cigarette use group showed, on average, a small effect size greater choice for the cigarette-cued monetary values than expected for indifference, t120 = 2.39, p = .02, d = 0.22. In contrast, the control group showed a large effect size bias against cigarette-cued monetary values away from indifference, t134 = 11.23, p < .001, d = 1.23. Similar between-group differences were observed at all other price differences (i.e., trials in which the values were different), p values < .02, with the exception of the +15 difference, p = .055. These effects were selective to drug cue trials with no significance differences observed in side selection on equal value trials, t254 = 0.30, p = .76, d = 0.03, nor significant differences from chance responding in either group, p values > .23.
Table 2 also contains bivariate associations between cigarette-cued choice bias on equal trials and demographic, cigarette, and alcohol use variables divided by cigarette use history. Cigarette-cued choice bias was significantly related to age and cigarettes per day in the cigarette use group, with younger participants and those reporting more cigarettes per day showing a greater bias. Participants in the control group that reported past daily cigarette use tended to show greater bias, but this association was not statistically significant, p = .051. Greater cigarette demand intensity, but not chocolate demand, was significantly related to greater choice bias.
Response Times
Median response times by cigarette use group and trial type are presented in Figure 5. There was a significant main effect of Trial type, F1,254 = 32.16, p < .001, that was superseded by a Group by Trial interaction, F1,254 = 4.08, p = .044 for response times. Follow-up tests indicated that this interaction was driven by a larger difference in response times to cigarette versus neutral cues in the control group, t134 = 5.04, p < .001, d = 0.43, than cigarette use group, t120 = 2.75, p = .007, d = 0.25, although both groups showed significantly faster response times on cigarette trials compared to neutral trials.
Rationale for Cued-Choice
Coding of qualitative responses indicated that approximately half (50%) of participants reported responding based on the quality of the image, a quarter (25%) reported responding based on instinct, and a quarter (25%) reported other reasons. Multiple regression models indicated no significant effect of rationale in the total sample, p values > .07. Interactions with cigarette use group indicated a significant interaction with the image rationale, p < .001. Followup tests indicated that for persons in the control group, a significant effect of reporting responding based on image quality was observed with lower bias scores for those participants (i.e., greater responding for the neutral-associated options), b = −0.24, β = −.48, p < .001. No significant effect of responding based on image guality was observed in the smoker group, b = 0.05, β = ,08, p = .50.
Experiment 2 Discussion
Experiment 2 evaluated cigarette-cued choice bias in a sample of participants reporting daily cigarette use and controls. Biased choices for cigarette-cued monetary values were observed in the smoking group, however, this effect was small in effect size. This bias was modestly related to the quantity of cigarette use (i.e., cigarettes per day) consistent with the quantity-frequency relationships observed in Experiment 1. This smaller effect size observed for the smoking group in Experiment 2 may be explained by the nature of cigarette-related cues. Specifically, studies on cigarette use have emphasized the importance of branding on smoking preferences and subjective effects with plain packaging or non-preferred brand cigarettes reported as more negative and less favorable and fresh in taste. Stimuli in this experiment were not branded, which may have contributed to the lower magnitude effect related to these cues. Additionally, these stimuli were strictly visual. Some evidence suggests that olfactory/taste stimuli play a more salient role than visual stimuli in cue-related contributions to hedonic ratings and cigarette self-administration. It is possible that the focus on visual cues subsequently diminished cue-related effects that have been observed with other modalities.
In contrast, a large effect size bias away from cigarette-cued choices was observed in the control group. Faster reaction times on cigarette trials (which contained decisions between cigarette and matched-neutral associated choices) than on neutral trials (which contained only neutral images) were also observed in the control group, reflecting a likely salience of those cigarette images. Similar response patterns against drug-cued choices have been observed with controls without a history of cocaine use (mean cocaine-cued choice 33.5%) and cannabis use (mean cocaine-cued choice 30.3%) in prior studies on cocaine and cannabis choice bias, respectively. This pattern of effect could represent conditioning that is not attributable to direct pharmacological exposure with the drug, but instead associations of these drug stimuli with undesirable health and criminal justice outcomes developed through educational or mass media settings. Behaviorally, these biases would then be attributable to associative pairings that result in a discriminative signal for punishment and/or conditioned aversion. This explanation could explain why fairly robust avoidance biases were observed for cigarettes, cocaine, and cannabis, but not for alcohol in Experiment 1, for which similar stigma and warnings against use are not as deeply or widely held. Nonetheless, such hypotheses are tentative in nature and specific tests involving, for example, within-laboratory conditioning of cues with specific positive and negative drug effects would be needed.
General Discussion
These experiments were designed to provide conceptual replications of recent work evaluating the role of spatially contiguous drug cues in concurrent reinforcer choice for non-drug reinforcers. As summarized following each experiment above, we replicate the finding that spatially contiguous drug-related cues can bias decisions involving concurrently presented nondrug reinforcers. These associations, as reported previously, were specific to an individual’s substance use history and related to substance use variables, and in particular, those measuring use quantity-frequency. Similarly, consistent with prior work, greater choice bias was associated with greater demand intensity for the relevant drug commodity, but not for nondrug comparators (e.g., soda in Experiment 1 or chocolate in Experiment 2). Below, we provide a brief summary of these cross-cutting findings and then describe and emphasize the future of basic and applied questions given this evidence of a replicable methodological procedure.
These findings involving a concurrent cued choice procedure expand upon prior research involving cue-based choices by providing information about how drug-related cues may impact decision-making in contexts outside of an explicit drug-taking event. The observation that drug-associated reinforcer choices are selected over those involving paired neutral imagery complements existing procedures involving direct cue choice (e.g., image selection) and the impact of drug-related cues on selection for drug reinforcers (or points redeemable for drug reinforcers). This distinction is important given that drug-related cues, and in particular alcohol and cigarette cues, are relatively pervasive in some environments (e.g., storefronts, advertisements, television) and more-than-likely to be present during decision-making events that do not explicitly involve drug consumption. Results from Experiment 2 and previously indicate that reinforcers presented with contiguous cocaine, cannabis, and cigarette use can each impact decisions not only when the primary reinforcer is equated (i.e., equal value trials), but also when that response option is of a lower value (i.e., disadvantageous). This selection under disadvantageous conditions is consistent with preclinical work that has shown that cue-associated incentive salience can drive suboptimal decision-making (i.e., result in lower rates of the primary reinforcer). Notably, evidence of disadvantageous decision-making across these studies was only observed on drug trials with relatively optimal performance found on the neutral-filler trials. Notably, in Experiment 2, controls without a history of tobacco cigarette use showed a similar if not more robust pattern of disadvantageous selection on cigarette trials selecting against the cigarette-cued side. As noted above (see Experiment 2 Discussion), this pattern possibly reflects prior associative parings with negative health and psycho-social consequences. These findings are important because it demonstrates that differences in responding are not attributable to global decrements in cognitive capacity among persons who use drugs. Instead, these changes in responding are specific to behavioral processes relevant to drug-related stimuli in both persons who do and do not use drugs (see discussions about assumptions about cognitive capacity among persons who use drugs in).
This study extended prior work by collecting and analyzing qualitative information about rationales for choices on equal value trials. Notably, across both experiments, approximately half of participants reported responding based on the salience or quality of the images, despite these images having no explicit impact on the amount of the monetary reinforcer received. Participants who reported responding based on this pattern of the image quality differed in choice bias for both experiments, although this association depended on both individual difference variables and drug type. Specifically, individuals with higher AUDIT scores showed greater response biases for alcohol-cued choices when responding based on image quality, whereas non-cigarette using controls showed lower response biases for cigarette-cued choices when responding based on image quality (or more likely a response bias against cigarette-cued choices). These outcomes suggest that the positive/approach related effects of alcohol use were more salient for persons reporting heavier drinking while the negative/avoidance effects of cigarette use were more salient for non-cigarette using controls. The lack of an approach effect of image rationales in the smoking group as well as the lower overall effect size could be explained by a greater negative automatic response to those cues. For example, a prior study on automatic responses to smoking cues found that controls as well as smokers with little-to-no current withdrawal showed negative responses to cigarette cues. Although we did not collect information regarding recency of cigarette use or withdrawal symptoms, given that participants were allowed to complete these tasks remotely, these participants were likely acting under conditions with limited withdrawal symptoms (i.e., cigarettes were readily available for consumption). More broadly, these findings detail the benefits that a mixed method approach can have in providing insight into and complement patterns of behavioral responses.
This study relied upon a sample gathered using crowdsourcing methods, which should be considered when interpreting the study findings. Recent research in the behavioral sciences, broadly, and addiction sciences, specifically, have leveraged crowdsourcing methods to generate larger and more diverse samples than typically afforded by college student or college community sampling. This work has demonstrated a good correspondence between findings obtained in-person and online helping provide support for the validity of the sampling approach. Nevertheless, online testing precludes biological verification of self-reported substance use status. We utilized best practice methods involving two-step screening previously shown to help discourage disingenuous responding. More broadly, research has also found that participants may find online settings more comforting in sharing sensitive personal information like substance use histories. Also relevant in the context of online research are limitations related to the (in)-ability to control the testing environment for events that may impact choices or reaction times (e.g., distractions or help from other individuals). Several features were used to help mitigate these concerns to include prescreening Internet connections within Qualtrics to ensure adequate speed for behavioral testing, explicit instructions to retain attention on the screen during the task, and an end-of-survev question about attention that would not impact study payment (“Do you feel that you took your time with this survey and that we should use your responses?”). More rigorous procedures could be implemented, however, such as asking participants for information about their operating system or context to determine impacts on behavioral performance. Laboratory follow-ups will be important for determining the generality of these findings as well as for allowing more precise experimental conditions such as manipulation of withdrawal states.
Studies conducted using this cued concurrent choice task to date have focused on relatively simple concurrent choices between a preferred drug-related stimuli and neutral stimuli. A more powerful demonstration of drug-associated bias would be to pit these drug-related stimuli against cues relevant to other salient non-drug reinforcers such as food or social imagery. A rich body of preclinical work, for instance, has found that social cues are competitive against drug cues in determining an organism’s allocation of behavior (see reviews in). Specifically, preclinical studies have shown that social interaction stimuli can compete with drug-associated stimuli to both reverse a preference for drug-associated contexts as well as inhibit reacquisition of drug-associated conditioned place preference following extinction. The current procedure provides an ample opportunity to study similar competition with cues for social and other prosocial reinforcers. Similarly, given the clear findings demonstrated here and elsewhere for single stimulus cues, studies that evaluate co-occurring or combined drug cues in a single task with populations that show substantive comorbidity (e.g., combined alcohol and cigarette use) will be relevant for determining the additive or multiplicative effects of these compound stimuli.
It would also be valuable to evaluate laboratory conditioned cues in addition to the general cues studied here. We have favored using general rather than specifically conditioned images in this procedure to avoid the medical stipulations involved in drug administration protocols. In fact, one of the benefits of this cued concurrent choice task and other explicit image choice procedures is the ability to work with populations for whom drug administration protocols are not practically or ethically feasible (e.g., those located remotely, treatment-seeking individuals). This strength is relevant given that treatment-seeking participants are among the most important populations for which research relevant to substance use disorder should generalize to. Nevertheless, the use of laboratory conditioning would allow for better standardization of image sets and testing of specific hypotheses involving positive and negative valence conditioning. Assessments of arousal or subjective effects related to cues would similarly would allow for analysis of possible mediational mechanisms that may explain the described choice biases. We also did not collect data about the recency of substance use. This information is relevant because factors like acute intoxication, withdrawal, and satiation might alter change cue-related decision-making. Future work would benefit from both collecting these data naturally as well as experimentally manipulating factors like withdrawal or acute drug administration to determine their impact on performance.
Finally, this and prior experiments have focused on cross-sectional associations involving task performance. As noted in the Introduction, research using complementary cue choice tasks have demonstrated predictive utility for cocaine and non-medical opioid use. Similar research could be conducted to determine how drug-associated choice bias in this concurrent choice procedure relate to both prospectively collected substance use and other high-risk activities that occur in other decision-making events proceeded by drug-related cues. This research combined by further basic science work evaluating behavioral mechanisms underlying task performance will be important for determining the clinical relevance for informing substance use disorder prevention and treatment efforts.
Supplementary Material
This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
Alternative monetary magnitudes were not tested and it is possible that a different response pattern would be observed with higher magnitude reinforcers. However, evidence for the salience of these values is observed in the Experiment 1 and 2 data in that participants, on average, were able to distinguish against differing amounts on unequal trials and select the higher amount (see Figures 2 and 4).
References
Motives to drink or not to drink: longitudinal relations among personality, motives, and alcohol use across adolescence and early adulthood
Switching to ultralow nicotine cigarettes: effects of different tar yields and blocking of olfactory cues
Individual differences and social influences on the neurobehavioral pharmacology of abused drugs
Latent factor structure of a behavioral economic cigarette demand curve in adolescent smokers
The AUDIT alcohol consumption questions (AUDIT-C): an effective brief screening test for problem drinking. Ambulatory Care Quality Improvement Project (ACQUIP). Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test
Meta-analysis of cue-reactivity in addiction research
Conducting clinical research using crowdsourced convenience samples
Isolating behavioural economic indices of demand in relation to nicotine dependence
Positive and negative reinforcement are differentially associated with alcohol consumption as a function of alcohol dependence
Suboptimal choice in rats: Incentive salience attribution promotes maladaptive decision-making
Alcohol cue reactivity, negative-mood reactivity, and relapse in treated alcoholic men
Evaluating Amazon’s Mechanical Turk as a tool for experimental behavioral research
Differential effects of accumbens core vs. shell lesions in a rat concurrent conditioned place preference paradigm for cocaine vs. social interaction
Reversal of cocaine-conditioned place preference and mesocorticolimbic Zif268 expression by social interaction in rats
A novel concurrent pictorial choice model of mood-induced relapse in hazardous drinkers
Is cognitive functioning impaired in methamphetamine users? A critical review
The Fagerstrom Test for Nicotine Dependence: a revision of the Fagerstrom Tolerance Questionnaire
Parallel goal-directed and habitual control of human drug-seeking: implications for dependence vulnerability
Evaluating psychological markers for human nicotine dependence: tobacco choice, extinction, and Pavlovian-to-instrumental transfer
Negative mood induction increases choice of heroin versus food pictures in opiate-dependent individuals: correlation with self-medication coping motives and subjective reactivity
Negative mood-induced alcohol-seeking is greater in young adults who report depression symptoms, drinking to cope, and subjective reactivity
Assessing and overcoming participant dishonesty in online data collection
Using crowdsourcing to examine relations between delay and probability discounting
Opportunity costs of reward delays and the discounting of hypothetical money and cigarettes
Understanding alcohol motivation using the alcohol purchase task: A methodological systematic review
Time constraints in the alcohol purchase task
Reliability and validity of data obtained from alcohol, cannabis, and gambling populations on amazon’s mechanical turk
A modified exponential behavioral economic demand model to better describe consumption data
Behavioral economic analysis of withdrawal- and cue-elicited craving for tobacco: an initial investigation
Further validation of a cigarette purchase task for assessing the relative reinforcing efficacy of nicotine in college smokers
Latent structure of facets of alcohol reinforcement from a behavioral economic demand curve
Behavioral economic analysis of cue-elicited craving for alcohol
Cue-elicited increases in incentive salience for marijuana: Craving, demand, and attentional bias
Cancer Patients Enrolled in a Smoking Cessation Clinical Trial: Characteristics and Correlates of Smoking Rate and Nicotine Dependence
Choice to view cocaine images predicts concurrent and prospective drug use in cocaine addiction
Behavioral preference for viewing drug v. pleasant images predicts current and future opioid misuse among chronic pain patients
Enhanced choice for viewing cocaine pictures in cocaine addiction
Cocaine choice procedures in animals, humans, and treatment-seekers: Can we bridge the divide?
Young adult women smokers’ response to using plain cigarette packaging: a naturalistic approach
Predictors of adult e-cigarette users vaporizing cannabis using e-cigarettes and vape-pens
Relative reinforcing efficacy of alcohol among college student drinkers
Cue reactivity during treatment, and not impulsivity, predicts an initial lapse after treatment in alcohol use disorders
Automatic affective responses to smoking cues
Reputation as a sufficient condition for data quality on Amazon Mechanical Turk
Sex differences in the subjective and reinforcing effects of visual and olfactory cigarette smoke stimuli
Spatial contiguity facilitates Pavlovian second-order conditioning
The neural basis of drug craving: an incentive-sensitization theory of addiction
Review. The incentive sensitization theory of addiction: some current issues
Sensory blockade of smoking satisfaction
Development of the Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT): WHO Collaborative Project on Early Detection of Persons with Harmful Alcohol Consumption--II
MTurk character misrepresentation: Assessment and solutions
Influence of premium vs masked cigarette brand names on the experienced taste of a cigarette after tobacco plain packaging in Australia: an experimental study
The role of ‘jackpot’ stimuli in maladaptive decision-making: dissociable effects of D1/D2 receptor agonists and antagonists
Identification and management of nonsystematic purchase task data: Toward best practice
Differential sensitivity to learning from positive and negative outcomes in cocaine users
Feasibility, acceptability, and initial efficacy of delivering alcohol use cognitive interventions via crowdsourcing
Unique prediction of cannabis use severity and behaviors by delay discounting and behavioral economic demand
Contribution of cannabis-related cues to concurrent reinforcer choice in humans
Contribution of cocaine-related cues to concurrent monetary choice in humans
The effects of social contact on drug use: Behavioral mechanisms controlling drug intake
Stimulus selectivity of drug purchase tasks: A preliminary study evaluating alcohol and cigarette demand
Evaluating autonomy, beneficence, and justice with substance-using populations: Implications for clinical research participation
The use of crowdsourcing in addiction science research: Amazon Mechanical Turk
Concurrent choice for social interaction and amphetamine using conditioned place preference in rats: effects of age and housing condition
Suboptimal choice by pigeons: an analog of human gambling behavior
Dyadic social interaction as an alternative reward to cocaine
Concurrent cued choice task diagram.
Depicted is an equal value trial in which the monetary reinforcer available was equal for the drug cue and matched-neutral cue.
Experiment 1 cued concurrent choice task performance.
Individuals reporting hazardous alcohol use according to the AUDIT (closed circle; solid line) and those without hazardous alcohol use (open circle; dotted line) completed a cued concurrent choice task for monetary reinforcers. Presented are mean percent choices for alcohol-cued monetary value across each quantitative difference in alcohol and neutral-cued values (top panel). Also presented are mean percent left-side choice on neutral filler trials (bottom panel). The y-axis dotted line represents indifference (50%). Equal value trials occurred at 0 (x-axis), in which alcohol-cued and neutral-cued values were equal. Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals.
Experiment 1 cued concurrent choice task reaction times.
Presented are group mean values for the median reaction times on equal value trials. Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals.
Experiment 2 cued concurrent choice task performance.
Individuals reporting current tobacco cigarette use (closed circle; solid line) and those without past 3-month cigarette use (open circle; dotted line) completed a cued concurrent choice task for monetary reinforcers. Presented are mean percent choices for cigarette-cued monetary value across each quantitative difference in cigarette and neutral-cued values (top panel). Also presented are mean percent leftside choice on neutral filler trials (bottom panel). The y-axis dotted line represents indifference (50%). Equal value trials occurred at 0 (x-axis), in which cigarette-cued and neutral-cued values were equal. Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals.
Experiment 2 cued concurrent choice task reaction times.
Presented are group mean values for the median reaction times on equal value trials. Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals.
Experiment 1 Demographics and Substance Use Variables
Mean/%	SD	Choice Bias r	 	Demographics				 	Age	35.2	11.0	−.04	 	Female	46.6%		.06	 	White	71.8%		.04	 	Incomea	4.2	3.0	−.04	 	College Education	64.1%		−.14	 	Alcohol Use				 	Drinks/Week	6.8	8.6	.30**	 	 Four Plus	53.4%		.37***	 	AUDIT	6.6	6.3	.37***	 	 AUDIT 8+	35.0%		.32***	 	 AUDIT-C	4.0	2.9	45***	 	Cigarette and Soda Use				 	Daily Cigarette Use	34.0%		.01	 	 Cigarettes Per Day	12.8	8.8	−.14	 	Ever Soda Use	68.9%		−.13	 	Sodas/Week	6.0	6.0	−.26*	 	Behavioral Economic Demandb				 	Alcohol Demand Intensity	0.66	0.30	.25*	 	Alcohol Demand Elasticity	−1.82	0.70	−.14	 	Soda Demand Intensity	0.37	0.31	−.17	 	Soda Demand Elasticity	−1.02	0.64	.14
Note. AUDIT = Alcohoxl Use Disorder Identification Test. Cigarettes per day only calculated for individuals reporting cigarette use.
Income coded in $10,000 bins (e.g., 4 = $40,001-$50,000/year)
All behavioral economic variables are presented as log10-tranformed values. Sample sizes for demand data are also smaller than the total sample due to non-systematic data (Alcohol Demand n = 76; Soda Demand n = 69)
p < .05;
p < .01;
p < .001
Experiment 2 Demographics and Substance Use Variables
Control (N = 135)	Cigarette Use (N = 121)	 		Mean (SD)/%	Choice Bias r	Mean (SD)/%	Choice Bias r	 	Demographics					 	Age	35.6 (12.2)	.03	37.3 (12.1)	−.19*	 	Female	51.1%	−.11	51.2%	−.13	 	White	80.0%	−.10	85.1%	−.03	 	Incomea	4.5 (3.0)	.10	3.5 (2.7)	−.06	 	College	65.2%	.04	48.8%	<.01	 	Drinks/Week	3.1 (5.5)	.08	8.3 (9.9)	.13	 	Past Week E-Cigarette Use	6.7%	.11	25.6%	.05	 	Cigarette Use					 	Former Cigarette Use	17.8%	.17	0%		 	Tobacco Cigarette Use	0%	-	100%	-	 	CPD	-	-	13.9 (7.8)	.19*	 	FTND	-	-	4.4 (2.4)	.12	 	Behavioral Economic Demandb					 	Cigarette Demand Intensity	-	-	1.33 (0.38)	.23*	 	Cigarette Demand Elasticity	-	-	−1.71 (0.47)	−.17	 	Chocolate Demand Intensity	1.27 (0.47)	.01	1.07 (0.48)	.03	 	Chocolate Demand Elasticity	−0.97 (0.46)	.07	−1.09 (0.72)	.22
Note. CPD = cigarettes per day; FTND = Fagerstrom Test of Nicotine Dependence.
Income coded in $10,000 bins (e.g., 3 = $30,001-$40,000/year)
All behavioral economic variables are presented as log10-tranformed values. Sample sizes for demand data are also smaller than the total sample due to non-systematic data (Cigarette Demand n = 102; Chocolate Demand n = 52 Controls & 58 Cigarette Use)
p < .05
Highlights
We evaluate the impact of alcohol and cigarette cues on concurrent choice
Choice for concurrent monetary reinforcers was influenced by cue presentation
Avoidance biases were observed for individual’s with limited substance use
Cue effects were associated with participant’s substance use history
