            A CONTINGENCY MODEL OF THE CRITICAL
              DETERMINANTS FOR ADOPTING MOBILE

                    CROWDSOURCING BROKERAGES



                                      Wael Soliman

                      Aalto University School of Business, Runeberginkatu 14-16
                                       Helsinki, Finland
                                  E-mail: wael.soliman@aalto.fi


Abstract

Mobile crowdsourcing brokerage (MCB) is a novel instance of sociotechnical innovations, and is seen as
an electronic market intermediary that facilitates the exchange of demand for, and supply of, problem
solving capabilities between organizations and the crowd, by utilizing the crowd’s explicit (i.e.,
participative), and implicit (i.e., opportunistic) mobile-based contributions to produce more valuable,
reliable and richer data. Although recent years have witnessed a growing academic interest in

crowdsourcing in general, and mobile crowdsourcing in particular; attention to MCB remains largely
practitioner-oriented. Whereas MCBs’ presence is growing in many fields, little is known about what
drives organizations to adopt them. Considering the novelty of this research focus, our aim is twofold:
firstly, to shed some light on the increasing number of MCBs in practice and position them in the
information systems (IS) research; and secondly, to propose a theoretically-informed model of the
contingency factors influencing organizations to adopt MCBs. Informed by the contingency theory, and
taking media as an exemplary industry, we argue that MCB adoption is significantly influenced by four
contextual factors: (1) technology, (2) organization, (3) environment, and (4) trust. A research model is
proposed, and limitations as well as future research direction are discussed.

Keywords: Mobile Crowdsourcing Brokerage, MCB, Intermediaries, Cybermediaries, Contingency
Model.



1       Introduction

The rapid development in Internet-connected mobile devices is attracting entrepreneurs and capital all
over the globe to introduce new business models and innovations. An industry report shows that more than
143,000 Internet-related businesses are started in developing economies alone every year (McKinsey
2013). Interestingly, in 2012, 13% of all Internet traffic originated from mobile devices (Deloitte 2013),
and in 2013 alone, over half a billion new mobile devices and connections were added, 77% of which
were smartphones, leading to a growth in global mobile data traffic by 81% during that year (Cisco 2014).

Smart devices (both phones and tablets), once considered luxury items, have become a way of living to
many. Globally, the number of people connected to the Internet using their smartphones and tablets in
2013 were more than 1.1 billion users, and this number is expected to get an addition of two to three
billion more users by 2025, which is estimated to generate a global economic impact of $3.7 trillion to
$10.8 trillion per year by 2025 (McKinsey 2013).
Mobile crowdsourcing, or crowdsourcing with smartphones, represents a unique opportunity for
investigation by both academics and practitioners. Mobile crowdsourcing is seen as a specific application
of crowdsourcing aimed at exploiting the vast amount of freely available resources generated by the crowd
and their smart devices. Especially that the processing power of the average smartphone has increased by
about 25% per year over the past five years, to the point that a smartphone in 2013 holds a processing
power equivalent to the fastest supercomputer of the 1970s (McKinsey 2013). Smart devices come packed

with an assortment of built-in capabilities, including HD c1meras, GPS, accelerometers, and light
detectors. More recent models, like Samsung Galaxy S4 , include sensors that monitor temperature,
humidity, and air pressure, making phones a goldmine of all types of data that could be utilized by
interested parties. In recent years, mobile crowdsourcing has started to gain a foothold in various domains,
like crisis management (Okolloh 2009), public health (Freifeld et al. 2010), citizen journalism (Väätäjä et
al. 2012), city maintenance (Santos et al. 2013), and urban sensing (Chon et al. 2013), among others. For

instance, mobile crowdsourcing applications like FixMyStreet (in UK, Canada and Korea) and
SeeClickFix (in USA) represent a type of crowdsourcing platforms which enable citizens to create
incident reports of problems (e.g., local roads damaged, graffiti, garbage in public roads, etc.) combined
with their smartphones’ capabilities (e.g., camera, Internet connection, GPS, etc.) and send these reports to
local officials facilitating informed-actions towards solving these problems (Santos et al. 2013). It is
obvious, then, that mobile crowdsourcing is visible, and indeed has been in use for several years, in many
fields and domains.


In this article, we focus our discussion on the media/news industry, firstly, because it represents one that is
under radical transformation and many players were forced to exit the playground (see, OECD 2010).
Secondly, because those who remain operational today are faced with a pressing need to renew their
business logic if they are to survive, and crowdsourcing is argued to be an inevitable component of their
future (Kelly 2009). While the role of the crowd in the media value-network is still debated between those
for and those against (Gillmor 2004; Maher 2005; Accenture 2007; Witschge & Nygren 2009; Shirky

2009; Paton 2012), entrepreneurs have been actively carving new spaces with their innovative business
models. One such model is mobile crowdsourcing brokerage (hereafter, MCB), which represents an
electronic market intermediary (i.e., cybermediary) that facilitate the exchange of demand for, and supply
of, problem solving capabilities between organizations and the crowd, by utilizing the crowd mobiles’
explicit and implicit mobile-based contributions to produce more valuable, reliable and richer data.
While in practice, organizations have adopted MCBs for some years, literature falls short from explaining
what influences the adoption decision of MCBs.


The purpose of this study is, therefore, to provide a theoretically-informed model that covers the critical
determinants influencing organizations’ decisions to adopt mobile crowdsourcing brokerages. To this end,
the article is organized in the following fashion. In section 2, the relevant IS research on mobile
crowdsourcing and brokerages is covered. In section 3, the contingency theory as well as its usage in IS
literature are briefly reviewed, followed by an illustration of the research model and its constituent four
hypotheses. Finally, in section 4, the concluding remarks and study limitations are discussed.


2        Related Literature

2.1      Crowdsourcing, Brokerage and Mobility

The term crowdsourcing was originally introduced by journalist Jeff Howe (Howe 2006), and ever since,

scholarly work on the subject has been on the rise (Leimeister et al. 2009; Antikainen et al. 2010; Schenk

1www.Samsung.com
& Guittard 2011; Afuah & Tucci 2012; Feller et al. 2012; Majchrzak & Malhotra 2013). Formally,
crowdsourcing is defined as a type of participative online activity in which a firm proposes to a group of
individuals of varying knowledge, heterogeneity, and number, via a flexible open call, the voluntary

undertaking of a task (Estellés-Arolas & González-Ladrón-de-Guevara, 2012). As such, crowdsourcing
represents a distant search (i.e., external sourcing) strategy for solutions that are costly or otherwise
impossible-to-solve using the local search (i.e., internal sourcing) approach (Afuah & Tucci 2013; Afuah
& Tucci 2012). Organizational problems come in all shapes and sizes; literature abounds of all types of
crowdsourced problems. They can be as mundane as transcribing an audio file , and as complex as
                                  3
solving wicked R&D challenges . Between these two extremes, crowdsourced problem can also be of a
creative nature - that is, problems requiring the crowd’s imaginative and creative capabilities (Schenk &
Guittard 2011). Creative challenges can be illustrated by organizations like the Finnish airline Finnair
(Jarvenpaa & Tuunainen 2013), the computer corporation Dell (Di Gangi et al. 2010), and the food service
giant Starbucks (Gallaugher & Ransbotham 2010) all of which have utilized the crowd’s innovative

capabilities for co-creating new service and product ideas. To answer the question of when crowdsourcing
is appropriate, Afuah and Tucci (2012) propose that the probability of an organization using
crowdsourcing is high when: (1) the problem is easy to delineate and broadcast, (2) the problem requires
distant search, (3) there is a crowd large and motivated enough to solve the problem, (4) the final solution
can be integrated in the seeking firm’s value chain; and finally (5) when IT is pervasive in the

environment that includes both the seeking firm and the crowd.
It is worth highlighting that crowdsourcing is, first and foremost, an electronic market (Alt & Klein 2011),

where seekers (usually firms seeking solutions to specific problems) and solvers (potentially anyone in
the crowd) are in the trade of solutions-for-rewards over an electronic communication platform. While it
is common that the crowdsourcing platform is moderated by the seeker organization, in many instances,
(third party) intermediaries take on the responsibilty of moderating the crowdsourcing platforms. In such
cases, these crowdsourcing platforms are known as cybermediaries (Jin & Robey 1999; Giaglis et al.

2002). Over a decade ago, IS research argued that cybermediaries would provide the necessary
infrastructure support for those market functions that would be fundamentally restructured in the
electronic commerce world (Giaglis et al. 2002), and that their core value stems from their relationship
with their customers (Vandermerwe 1999). Only recently, research has paid attention to the prominence of
brokerages’ role in crowdsourcing. In their explorative study in the context of open innovation networks,

Feller et al. (2012) found that crowdsourcing brokerages’ major importance stems from their role in
mobilizing knowledge transfer between seekers and solvers, and the mechanisms they develop to support
value capturing from the crowdsourcing process. The study also points out that trust among players in the
crowdsourcing process is a key factor in crowdsourcing’s long-term stability.

The specificity of mobility has largely gone unnoticed in crowdsourcing literature. Mobility takes the
traditional concept of crowdsourcing to a whole new level, transcending the spatial, temporal and
contextual barriers (Kakihara & Sorensen 2001). Before the introduction of smartphones, most mobile
crowdsourcing examples were predominantly limited to SMS (text messaging) as the communication

channel. Txteagle, for instance, enables its users to earn small amounts of money (usually in the form of
airtime) by completing simple tasks like transcribing an audio segment and sending it as an SMS via the
phone (Eagle 2009). Other examples have also emerged with a public value in mind, in which rewards are
not necessarily financial in nature. For example, in the public health context, FrontLineSMS and GeoChat
are mobile crowdsourcing platforms (aka, “participatory epidemiology”) that use SMS for collecting and

communicating information to achieve faster and more coordinated responses to disease outbreaks and
natural disasters (Freifeld et al. 2010). Closely related, Ushahidi was one of the earliest crowdsourcing

2
3As in Amazon mTurk (http://www.mturk.com/).
 As in InnoCentive (http://www.innocentive.com).
SMS-based platforms, intended to harness the benefits of crowdsourcing for collecting and sharing crisis
and violence information in environments where rumours and uncertainty are dominant, as in the 2007
post-election violence in Kenya (Okolloh 2009), and the Haitian 2010 earthquake (Freifeld et al. 2010).

The past few years, however, have witnessed a surge both in mobile device development and adoption.
Smart portable devices (phones and tablets) have gone from a luxury for the elite to a way of life for more
than one billion users who own smartphones and tablets (McKinsey 2013). Interestingly, a modern
smartphone at an average cost of $400 (e.g., iPhone 4), matches the computing power of the fastest
supercomputer in 1975 at the cost of $5 million of that time (McKinsey 2013). It is not surprising then

that the availability of supercomputing portable devices in the hands of the masses is reshaping the way
mobile crowdsourcing is practiced and perceived. Consequently, recent research emphasizes two types of
contributions when it comes to mobile crowdsourcing: explicit (aka, participative) and implicit (aka,
opportunistic) input (Alt et al. 2010; Chatzimilioudis et al. 2012). Explicit input generation describes the
process in which the crowd solvers intentionally take the conscious effort to produce content (e.g., report a
pothole). Implicit input generation describes content that is generated implicitly through human-computer

interaction, usually generated from sensors and computations performed by the devices automatically
(e.g., time stamps and positional triangulation) (Chatzimilioudis et al. 2012; Alt et al. 2010). This dual
capability (i.e., implicit and explicit content generation) of mobile crowdsourcing applications, in our
opinion, is the most distinctive feature that sets mobile and traditional crowdsourcing apart.

2.2       Mobile Crowdsourcing Brokerages (MCB) in the Media Context


Media is in constant pursuit for fresh and authentic content; and content crowdsourcing has attracted the
attention of both opponents and proponents. Opponents, on the one hand, consider user-generated content
(UGC) as a major threat to the media industry (Accenture 2007), and that only professionals have the sole
right to produce content (see e.g., Witschge & Nygren 2009) based on the assumption that crowd
generated content (i.e., UGC) is subjective, unreliable and chaotic (Maher 2005). Proponents, on the other
hand, see it differently. They see that the journalism business model is irreversibly broken (Shirky 2009),

and that the crowd must be considered as an active participant, rather than receptive audience, in whatever
substituting model (Gillmor 2004; Kelly 2009; Soliman 2013). While the debate continues (see e.g., Paton
2012), entrepreneurs in the media industry have been actively working on introducing innovative business
models, like MCB. In line with Alt et al.'s (2010) mobile crowdsourcing characterisation, MCBs have
three basic components: (1) a web interface where seekers can upload their tasks; (2) a server including a
database for storing the tasks, which is responsible for distributing these tasks to potential solvers; (3) a

mobile app for the solvers’ smartphones, responsible for pulling and submitting the tasks.
For instance, FileMobile (www.filemobile.com) manages the gathering, organizing, and broadcasting of
news-related content. On the solver/crowd side, in addition to the explicit content collection, the app

utilizes GPS information, in-app push notifications, as well as feed extraction from other social
networking apps installed on the device. On the seeker side, the platform has been deployed by many
news organizations like, Gannett, Wall Street Journal and Fox News among others. Scoopshot
(www.schoopshot.com) is another MCB example. It is a location-based mobile app that connects seekers
and solvers of images (both still and video). On the solver side, the application utilizes the implicit
location information for two purposes: sending location-specific tasks to their users, and authenticating

submitted images. On the seeker side, Scoopshot has more than 60 publications globally including Metro
(International), WAZ Media Group (Germany), MTV3 (Finland), and Hürriyet (Turkey). In addition to
fulfilling news needs, the content generated by Scoopshot is also utilized for brand marketing purposes.
ShareItMobilte (www.shareitmobile.com) offers similar intermediary services for both news and

4
 $5 million in 1975 is equivalent to $32 million in 2013 at annual inflation rate of 4.3% (McKinsey, 2013).
advertising tasks. Other MCBs are more specific in their orientation. Olapic (www.olapic.com), for

instance, dedicates its efforts solely to curating rich content for advertising requirements; iWitness24
(www.iwitness24.co.uk) focuses only on content for local news needs; while                  Bambuser
(www.bambuser.com) focuses mainly on real-time video streaming through the crowd’s smartphones.
Bambuser is a rather interesting case: on the crowd side, users can easily stream and share live videos
using their smartphones, and broadcasts can be shared on most social networking sites. On the seeker side,
Bambuser has been widely used by many news agencies to cover news coming from different origins
including difficult-to-access regions. In June 2013 the Associated Press made a purchase of a minority
stake in the platform (AP 2013). This MCB list is by no means an exhaustive one, and many of them have
been around for several years.


3        Contingency Theory and Technology Adoption

Although many researchers have strived toward developing a unified model for adoption that can apply to
all types of technologies, we join the school of thought that suggest this might be an inappropriate
approach considering the differences between different types of innovations (see, Lee & Shim 2007). With
this in mind, the contingency theory (CT) provides a theoretical lens for much of the work investigating

the diverse factors influencing an organization’s decision to adopt an innovation. The CT depicts the
organization as a "social system consisting of subsystems of resource variables interrelated by various
management policies, practices and techniques which interact with variables in the environmental supra-
system to achieve a set of goals or objectives” (Luthans & Stewart, 1977, p. 184). This definition
highlights the interdependencies among the various factors (both internal and external to the focal
organization), and their impact on the organization’s destiny. As such, the core argument for the CT is that
there is no single best way to manage an organization, make decisions, or achieve the necessary fit -
among organizational and environment factors - to attain a good performance for an organization (Teo et

al. 1998; Weill & Olson 1989). Weill and Olson (1989), in their meta-analysis of use of CT in the IS field,
identified seven contingency variables of interest to MIS researchers: strategy, structure, size,
environment, technology, task, and individual characteristics. These contingencies have molded much of
the IS research seeking to explain (both qualitatively and quantitatively) the adoption of technological
innovations at the organizational level. This includes studies investigating the contingency factors
influencing the adoption of Internet (Teo et al. 1998; Teo & Pian 2003); the adoption of e-commerce
(MacKay et al. 2004); the adoption of EDI (Iacovou et al. 1995); the adoption of e-services (Rapp et al.
2008); as well as the adoption of mobile commerce in organizations (Alfahl et al. 2012). The unifying
theme among all these studies is that organizational adoption of a certain technology is dependent on three

generic interrelated factors: technological factors, organizational factors and environmental factors - often
referred to as the technology-organization-environment (TOE) framework (Tornatzky & Fleischer 1990).
In addition to these three factors, we contend that the question of trust should not be overlooked. While
trust is not usually considered as a contingency factor in organizational technology adoption research, it is
a core issue in electronic commerce research (Giaglis et al. 2002; Alt & Klein 2011; Duan et al. 2012).
Each of these four factors will be elaborated in the following sections.

3.1      Technological Factors

Technological (innovation) factors represent one of the widely accepted determinants of the rate of

organizational adoption of new technologies (Lee & Shim 2007). Technological factors represent those
(perceived) characteristics of the innovation itself (Teo et al. 1998). Innovation here denotes that “a
technology [is] actually being used or applied for the first time” (Utterback, 1974, p. 621) from the
adopting firm perspective. In the context of MCB, it is important to discuss the technological factors at
two levels of analysis: holistic technology level and mobile technology level. The former focuses on the
contingency factors of the technology package as a whole (e.g., its perceived benefit to a firm’s specific
needs), while the latter focuses on the contingency factors of the mobile app and its capability for utilizing
the crowd’s power.

At the holistic technology level, it is widely agreed that the rate of technology adoption is significantly
influenced by perceived benefits (i.e., relative advantage) and compatibility (Iacovou et al. 1995; Teo et
al. 1998; MacKay et al. 2004; Lee & Shim 2007; Chong et al. 2009). Literature shows that organizations
adopt technology when it is expected to overcome a performance gap or exploit a business opportunity.
More specifically, earlier research points out that the greater the perceived benefit of a technology, the
more likely an organization will adopt it (Duan et al. 2012). Similarly, it is argued that the compatibility of

a technology is positively related to its rate of its adoption. For instance, Lee and Shim (2007) point out
that, the more a technology is compatible with the current situation and needs of a potential adopter, the
more likely this technology will be adopted.

At the mobile technology level, our aim is to capture the MCB’s capability of generating the most value
out of the participating crowds. Thus, we divide these capabilities into two broad categories: app’s
technical capability and app’s user base. Technical capability reflects the MCB’s ability to capture both
explicit and implicit input from the crowd (Chatzimilioudis et al. 2012; Alt et al. 2010). For example, an
MCB’s mobile application that is capable of providing a GPS-based authentication algorithm is expected

to be more influential on the adoption decision than applications that do not utilize this implicit data. User
base, on the other hand, reflects the platform’s ability to reach and cater for large user base via the mobile
app. Although the user base clearly is not a technical issue, we argue that it is an inseparable component of
how the MCB’s mobile application is perceived and evaluated. Having a large user base (i.e., crowd) of
active solvers is a fundamental requirement of any crowdsourcing endeavor. For instance, the Associated
Press’ adoption of, and later investment in, Bambuser is claimed to be driven by the platform’s proven
track record for nurturing a large and active user base (AP 2013). Therefore, we hypothesize that:

H1: There is a positive and significant relationship between the technological factors [perceived benefit –

compatibility –App’s technical capabilities – App’s user base] and firms’ adoption level of MCB.

3.2       Organizational Factors

Organizational factors represent those variables affecting the organizational structure that the organization
could manipulate to adapt to its changing environment (Teo et al. 1998). Examples of organizational
factors include top management support, risk-taking position and organizational readiness (Ram et al.
2013; Duan et al. 2012; Teo et al. 1998). Earlier studies investigating domains similar to the MCB context
found that at least one organizational factor had a significant impact on innovation adoption. Top

management support turned out to be the prime determinant of e-market adoption (Duan et al. 2012).
Organizational readiness – both financial and technical – was found to be a significant determinant in
the context c-commerce adoption (Chong et al. 2009) and e-commerce (MacKay et al. 2004) studies. Risk
taking position expresses a firm’s willingness and ability to take risks associated with making changes in
the firm’s structure, processes, and strategy (Eze 2008; Teo et al. 1998). Risk taking was found to have a
significant impact on e-business adoption (Eze 2008). This is not to say that all previous research was
consistent in this regard. For instance, Teo and Pian (2003) found no significant relationship between

organizational factors and internet adoption, while Rapp et al. (2008) found no significant relationship
between organizational factors e-service adoption. Therefore, in the context of MCB, we hypothesize
that:

H2: There is a positive and significant relationship between the organizational factors [top management
support – organizational readiness – risk taking position] and firms’ adoption level of MCB.
3.3       Environmental Factors

Environmental factors represent those changes in the organization’s external environment that are beyond
the control of management, creating both threats and opportunities (Teo et al. 1998). For instance, both
environmental uncertainty and competition serve as pressures on organizations (Lee & Shim 2007),
often forcing them to adopt new technologies, if they to remain competitive in their dynamic
environments (Iacovou et al. 1995; MacKay et al. 2004; Duan et al. 2012). Many empirical studies found a
significant and positive relationship between environmental factors and technology adoption. For instance,

in the case of Malaysian firms’ adoption of c-commerce systems (Chong et al. 2009), Australian SMEs’
adoption of e-market platforms (Duan et al. 2012), even in the U.S. hospitals’ adoption of RFID
technologies (Lee & Shim 2007). Interestingly, the impact of the external pressures on technology
adoption has not been consistent in the literature. For instance, in their investigation of the antecedents of
ERP adoption, Ram et al. (2013) that environmental hostility, dynamism, and heterogeneity negatively
impact found a significant impact on the Australian firms’ decision to adopt ERP systems. Yet, Teo et al.
(1998) found that of the environmental pressures had had no significant impact on Singaporean firms’
adoption of the Internet. One plausible explanation is that these environmental factors, and the impact

thereof, might be country-, or region-specific (Ram et al. 2013).

In addition to environmental uncertainty and competitive pressures, we propose that the pervasiveness of
the inclusion expectation forces in the external environment will have a significant influence on firms’
adoption of MCB. This point needs some elaboration. Many argue that modern society organizes itself
around functional differentiation - that is, by delegating different functions to specialized societal systems
in order to cope with societal problems (Görke & Scholl 2006). This explains why politics are handled by
politicians, journalism is handled by journalists, law and order is enforced by the police, etc. This,
however, does not mean that in reality these societal systems are self-sufficient and isolated from one

another. While no one system can (or should) fulfil another system’s function, every system relies on the
problem-solving capacity of all the other systems fulfilling their functions (ibid). This is one of the
fundamental drivers for the crowdsourcing phenomenon. One needs not hold a journalism degree to report
breaking news (as in Scoopshot mobile app); one needs not hold a medical degree to solve medical
problems (as in Fold.it mobile game); and one needs not be employed by the traffic police to report traffic
data (as in Waze mobile app).

Within this perception, the inclusion theory was introduced to consider how social systems include their
audiences (who are composed of actors from various other systems) by taking them into account for their

own systemic operations and logics (Loosen & Schmidt 2012). As such, one of the main assumptions of
this theoretical framing is that inclusion performance (i.e., the actual inclusion practice) within a social
system is influenced to a great extent by the inclusion expectations (i.e., the attitudes, norms and
perceptions with respect to audience inclusion). For instance, in the context of journalism, inclusion
expectations represent more or less specific images of the audience as perceived by journalists, and is seen
as “the sum of cognitive patterns guiding the practice of journalism” (Loosen & Schmidt 2012, p. 876). It
is proposed that inclusion expectations can be measured by two components: (1) self-perception of one’s
own professional role and the place audience participation takes within that profession. (2) Expectation-

expectations, that is, expectations about the degree to which the audience expect to be able to participate
in journalism. Together, these expectations shape the strategies driving most social systems (i.e.,
industries) not only journalism. With this in mind, we hypothesize that:

H3: There is a positive and significant relationship between the environmental factors [uncertainty –
competition – inclusion expectations] and firms’ adoption level of MCB.
3.4       Trust

Trust reflects the degree of faith, reliance, belief or confidence in the business partners, and in the
electronic trading process itself (Duan et al. 2012; Chong et al. 2009). In the same fashion we discussed
technological factors at two levels of analysis (i.e., holistic and mobile), we propose that two levels of
trust need to be considered: trust in crowdsourcing (i.e., as an electronic exchange model), and trust in
trading partners (i.e., the MCB itself). Giaglis et al. (2002) argue that some market transactions require
the establishment of a certain level of trust between buyer and seller, and that intermediaries act as a trust-

building function. This is particularly true in electronic market context, where intermediaries guarantee to
both sellers and buyers the non-opportunistic behaviour of other participants in that market. Trust was
found to be a dominant factor in the adoption of collaborative commerce technology among Malaysian
firms (Chong et al. 2009). Trust was also found to have a significant relationship with the electronic
market adoption among Australian SMEs (Duan et al. 2012). In their research on innovation
crowdsourcing intermediation, Feller et al. (2012) concluded that trust in the fairness and efficacy of the
brokerage, its systems and processes were fundamental factors for their success and stability. As such,
seekers need to trust crowdsourcing in general, and crowdsourcing intermediaries in particular, to be able

to accept MCBs as part of their value network. Therefore, we hypothesize that:

H4: There is a positive and significant relationship between the trust [in crowdsourcing and in MCB] and
firms’ adoption level of MCB.

3.5       The Dependent Variable: MCB Adoption

The aim of the research at hand is to examine the hypothesized relationships of organizational,
technological, environmental, and trust factors with the adoption level of MCB. However, capturing the
level of technology adoption in previous studies has not been a straightforward endeavor. The nature of

the dependent variable has varied largely in most part depending on the type of the technology under
study, and how the researchers conceptualized its adoption maturity (i.e., diffusion). Many studies utilized
a simplified dichotomous variable, ‘yes’ or ‘no’ to the adoption decision. For instance, in the context of e-
market adoption, Duan et al. (2012) operationalized the dependent variable using ‘adopters’ vs. ‘non-
adopters’, while in the Internet adoption context, Teo et al. (1998) used a categorical measure with three
states: ’non-adopters’, ‘adopters without websites’ and ‘adopters with websites’. While the dichotomous
approach has been an acceptable measure, there were efforts to devise a better measurement to capture a
finer level of granularity. Teo and Pian (2003) proposed an operationalization that measures the level of

Internet adoption depending on the scope of the Internet-based tools being used. In this case, the level of
internet adoption was measured based on a 5-item measurement scale, from lowest to highest, as follows:
‘email adoption’, ‘Internet presence’, ‘prospecting’, ‘business integration’, and business transformation’.
In a similar vein, measuring the level of c-commerce adoption, Chong et al. (2009) used a slightly
different 5-item measurement scale, from lowest to highest: ‘unaware of c-commerce tools’, ‘aware of’,
‘shown an interest’ and ‘committed’, and ‘deployed’. Lee and Shim's (2007) research’s aim, on the other
hand, was to predict the RFID adoption. To meet this objective, they used multiple items measuring future

plan as well as current adoption status of an organization.

As presented in the earlier section, and exemplified in the media sector, we could observe similar levels of
MCB adoption. In some cases, we could observe very strong commitment in the form of full acquisition
of the technology, as exemplified by CNN’s acquisition of the iReport platform (Shea 2008). Such cases
are expected to be rare, however, other organizations show relatively strong commitment, as exemplified
by AP’s investment in Bambuser (AP 2013). Yet, other organization utilize MCBs to a lesser extent, as
exemplified in the Finnish media organization ad-hoc deployment of Scoopshot as a service (Väätäjä et
al. 2013). In line with previous technology adoption research, in the empirical setting we expect to observe
three more levels of adoption: organizations that only show in interest in MCB; organizations that are
aware of MCB, and finally organizations that are unaware of such technologies. Figure 1 illustrates the

proposed research model.


       Technology
       (a)   Perceived   Benefit;   (b)   Compatibility; H1
       (c) App’s Technical Capabilities; (d) App’s user base.



        Organization
        (a) Top Management Support; (b) Organizational   H2

        Readiness; (c) Risk Taking Position.
                                                                                    MCB
                                                                                  Adoption

        Environment
        (a) Uncertainty; (b) Competition; (c) Inclusion  H3
        Expectations.



        Trust
        (a) Trust in Crowdsourcing; (b) Trust in MCB     H4





Figure 1.   A Model of the Critical Determinants for Adopting Mobile Crowdsourcing Brokerages (MCB)

4        Conclusion


Our review of existing literature has suggested that crowdsourcing brokerages, in general, and in
particular those focusing on mobile business (i.e., mobile crowdsourcing brokerages), have not received
enough attention in IS research. We have defined mobile crowdsourcing brokerage (MCB) as an
electronic market intermediary that facilitates the exchange of demand for, and supply of, problem solving
capabilities between organizations and the crowd, by utilizing both their explicit and implicit mobile-

based contributions. Based on earlier mobile crowdsourcing research (Alt et al. 2010; Chatzimilioudis et
al. 2012) and using a number of real life examples, we have shown that MCBs commonly share three
basic components: (1) a web interface to interact with the seekers; (2) a server including a database; (3) a
mobile app to interact with the crowd.

Drawing on the contingency theory and the TOE framework, this paper has utilized earlier IS research on

electronic commerce and technology adoption. This body of research highlights the significant impact of
technological, organizational and environmental factors on organizational technology adoption decision.
We have extended the TOE framework by incorporating five variables to capture the specificity of the
MCB in the media/news industry context. These additional variables have been argued to measure: the
mobile application’s technical capabilities, the mobile application’s user base, inclusion expectations, trust

in the crowdsourcing process as whole, and trust in the MCB as a trading partner. These proposed
extensions, together with the widely utilized contingency factors from earlier technology adoption
research, have formed the basis for a contingency model for organizational adoption of MCBs, and its four
constituent hypotheses, as illustrated in figure 1.

Clearly the model provided in this paper requires much further thought as well as empirical support. A
large scale quantitative study would seem the natural next step to validate the proposed hypotheses. We
acknowledge that the paper has a number of limitations, and that some issues were left out without
adequate elaboration. Firstly, the model does not take into account factors that hamper organizational
adoption of MCBs. For instance, it is expected that some organizations may not be at liberty to trade with
commercial MCBs due to internal policy restraints, as in some publicly-funded broadcasting firms.

Secondly, the model’s explanatory power is not intended to be generalizable to all types of technology in
all domains. Thus, we expect that MCB adoption in contexts beyond the media industry will be contingent
on slightly modified versions of our proposed model.


References

Accenture, 2007. User-generated content is top threat to media and entertainment industry, Accenture
     survey finds. , (01.11.2011). Available at:
     http://newsroom.accenture.com/article_display.cfm?article_id=4534 [Accessed November 1, 2011].
Afuah, A. & Tucci, C.L., 2012. Crowdsourcing as a solution to distant search. Academy of Management
     Review, 37(3), pp.355–375.

Afuah, A. & Tucci, C.L., 2013. Value capture and crowdsourcing. Academy of Management Review,
     38(3), pp.457–460.
Alfahl, H., Sanzogni, L. & Houghton, L., 2012. Mobile commerce adoption in organizations: A literature
     review and future research directions. Journal of Electronic Commerce in Organizations, 10(2),
     pp.61–78.
Alt, F. et al., 2010. Location-based crowdsourcing: Extending crowdsourcing to the real world. In
     NordiCHI. Reykjavik, Iceland, pp. 13–22.
Alt, R. & Klein, S., 2011. Twenty years of electronic markets research—looking backwards towards the

     future. Electronic Markets, 21(1), pp.41–51.
Antikainen, M., Mäkipää, M. & Ahonen, M., 2010. Motivating and supporting collaboration in open
     innovation. European Journal of Innovation Management, 13(1), pp.100–119.
AP, 2013. AP buys stake in Bambuser, strengthens live UGC video capability. Associated Press.
     Available at: http://www.ap.org/Content/Press-Release/2013/AP-buys-stake-in-Bambuser-
     strengthens-live-UGC-video-capability [Accessed January 10, 2014].
Chatzimilioudis, G. et al., 2012. Crowdsourcing with smartphones. IEEE Internet Computing, 16(5),

     pp.36–44.
Chon, Y. et al., 2013. A large-scale study of mobile crowdsourcing with smartphones for urban sensing
     applications. In UbiComp. Zurich, Switzerland: ACM.
Chong, A.Y.-L. et al., 2009. Factors affecting the adoption level of c-commerce: An empirical study. The
     Journal of Computer Information Systems, 50(2), pp.13–22.
Cisco, 2014. Cisco Visual Networking Index: Global Mobile Data Traffic Forecast Update, 2013–2018,
     Available at: http://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/solutions/collateral/service-provider/visual-networking-
     index-vni/white_paper_c11-520862.html.

Deloitte, 2013. Tech Trends 2013: Elements of postdigital,
Duan, X., Deng, H. & Corbitt, B., 2012. Evaluating the critical determinants for adopting e-market in
     Australian small-and-medium sized enterprises. Management Research Review, 35(3/4), pp.289–
     308.
Eagle, N., 2009. txteagle: Mobile crowdsourcing. In Internationalization, Design and Global
     Development. Springer.
Estellés-Arolas, E. & González-Ladrón-de-Guevara, F., 2012. Towards an integrated crowdsourcing
     definition. Journal of Information Science, pp.1–14.
Eze, U. c., 2008. E-business deployment in Nigerian financial firms: An empirical analysis of key factors.
     International Journal of E-Business Research, 4(2), pp.29–47.

Feller, J. et al., 2012. “Orchestrating” sustainable crowdsourcing: A characterisation of solver brokerages.
     The Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 21(3), pp.216–232.
Freifeld, C.C. et al., 2010. Participatory epidemiology: Use of mobile phones for community-based health
     reporting. PLoS Medicine, 7(12).
Gallaugher, J. & Ransbotham, S., 2010. Social media and customer dialog management at Starbucks. MIS
     Quarterly Executive, 9(4), pp.1389–1404.
Di Gangi, P.M., Wasko, M.M. & Hooker, R.E., 2010. Getting customers’ ideas to work for you: Learning

     from Dell how to succeed with online user innovation communities. MIS Quarterly Executive, 9(4),
     pp.213–228.
Giaglis, G.M., Klein, S. & O’Keefe, R.M., 2002. The role of intermediaries in electronic marketplaces:
     Developing a contingency model. Information Systems Journal, 12, pp.231–246.
Gillmor, D., 2004. We the media: Grassroots journalism by the people, for the people, Sebastopol:
     O’Reilly Media.
Görke, A. & Scholl, A., 2006. Niklas Luhmann’s theory of social systems and journalism research.

     Journalism Studies, 7(4), pp.644–655.
Howe, J., 2006. The Rise of Crowdsourcing. Wired Magazine, (14.06). Available at:
     http://www.wired.com/wired/archive/14.06/crowds.html [Accessed August 20, 2011].
Iacovou, C.L., Benbasat, I. & Dexter, A.S., 1995. Electronic data interchange and small organizations:
     Adoption and impact of technology. MIS Quarterly, 19(4), p.465.
Jarvenpaa, S.L. & Tuunainen, V.K., 2013. How Finnair socialized customers for service co-creation with

     social media. MIS Quarterly Executive, 12(3), pp.125–136.
Jin, L. & Robey, D., 1999. Explaining cybermediation: An organizational analysis of electronic retailing.
     International Journal of Electronic Commerce, 3(4), pp.47–65.
Kakihara, M. & Sorensen, C., 2001. Expanding the “mobility” concept. ACM SIGGROUP Bulletin, 22(3),
     pp.33–37.
Kelly, J., 2009. Challenges - Red Kayaks and Hidden Gold: The Rise, Challenges and Value of Citizen
     Journalism, Oxford: Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism. Available at:

     http://reutersinstitute.politics.ox.ac.uk/fileadmin/documents/Publications/Red_Kayaks___Hidden_G
     old.pdf.
Lee, C.-P. & Shim, J.P., 2007. An exploratory study of radio frequency identification (RFID) adoption in
     the healthcare industry. European Journal of Information Systems, 16(6), pp.712–724.
Leimeister, J.M., Huber, M. & Krcmar, H., 2009. Leveraging crowdsourcing: Activation-supporting
     components for IT-based ideas competition. Journal of Management Information Systems, 26(1),
     pp.197–224.

Loosen, W. & Schmidt, J.-H., 2012. (Re-)Discovering the audience: The relationship between journalism
     and audience in networked digital media. Information, Communication & Society, 15(6), pp.867–
     887.
Luthans, F. & Stewart, T.I., 1977. A general contingency theory of management. Academy of
     Management Review, 2(2), pp.181–195.
MacKay, N., Parent, M. & Hobday, M., 2004. A model of electronic commerce adoption by small

     voluntary organizations. European Journal of Information Systems, 13(2), pp.147–159.
Maher, V., 2005. Citizen journalism is dead. New Media Lab, School of Journalism & Media Studies,
     Rhodes University, South Africa. Available at: http://kombinasi.net/citizen-journalism-is-dead/.
Majchrzak, A. & Malhotra, A., 2013. Towards an information systems perspective and research agenda on
     crowdsourcing for innovation. The Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 22(4), pp.257–268.
McKinsey, 2013. Disruptive technologies: Advances that will transform life, business, and the global
     economy,
OECD, 2010. The evolution of news and the Internet. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
     Development.

Okolloh, O., 2009. Ushahidi, or “testimony”: Web 2.0 tools for crowdsourcing crisis information.
     Participatory Learning and Action, (59), pp.65–70.
Paton, J., 2012. Old dogs new tricks and crappy newspaper executives. Digital First. Available at:
     http://jxpaton.wordpress.com/2012/02/18/old-dogs-new-tricks-and-crappy-newspaper-executives/
     [Accessed December 10, 2012].
Ram, J., Corkindale, D. & Wu, M.-L., 2013. Enterprise resource planning adoption: Structural equation
     modeling analysis of antecdants. The Journal of Computer Information Systems, 54(1), pp.53–65.

Rapp, A., Rapp, T. & Schillewaert, N., 2008. An empirical analysis of e-service implementation:
     Antecedents and the resulting value creation. Journal of Services Marketing, 22(1), pp.24–36.
Santos, J., Rodrigues, F. & Oliveira, L., 2013. A web & mobile city maintenance reporting solution.
     Procedia Technology, 9, pp.226–235.
Schenk, E. & Guittard, C., 2011. Towards a characterization of crowdsourcing practices. Journal of
     Innovation Economics, 1(7), pp.92–107.
Shea, D., 2008. CNN Shells Out $750K For ireport.com Domain. TheHuffingtonPost.com, Inc. Available

     at: http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2008/01/18/cnn-shells-out-750k-for-i_n_82210.html?
Shirky, C., 2009. Newpaper and thinking the unthinkable. shirky.com. Available at:
     http://www.shirky.com/weblog/2009/03/newspapers-and-thinking-the-unthinkable/ [Accessed
     December 10, 2012].
Soliman, W., 2013. Crowdsourcing as a sourcing strategy for the ambidextrous organization. In The XXIV
     ISPIM Conference. Helsinki, Finland.

Teo, T.S.H. & Pian, Y., 2003. A contingency perspective on Internet adoption and competitive advantage.
     European Journal of Information Systems, 12(2), pp.78–92.
Teo, T.S.H., Tan, M. & Buk, W.K., 1998. A contingency model of Internet adoption in Singapore.
     International Journal of Electronic Commerce, 2(2), pp.95–118.
Tornatzky, L.G. & Fleischer, M., 1990. The Processing of Technological Innovation, Lexington Books,
     Lexington, MA.
Utterback, J.M., 1974. Innovation in industry and the diffusion of technology. Science, 183, pp.620–626.

Väätäjä, H., Sirkkunen, E. & Ahvenainen, M., 2013. A field trial on mobile crowdsourcing of news
     content - Factors influencing participation. Human-Computer Interactions - INTERACT, 8119,
     pp.54–73.
Väätäjä, H., Vainio, T. & Sirkkunen, E., 2012. Location-based crowdsourcing of hyperlocal news –
     Dimensions of participation preferences. In Group’12 International Conference on Supporting
     Group Work. Floria: ACM, pp. 85–94.
Vandermerwe, S., 1999. The electronic “go-between service provider”: A new “middle” role taking centre

     stage. European Management Journal, 17(6), pp.598–608.
Weill, P. & Olson, M.H., 1989. An assessment of the contingency theory of management information
     systems. Journal of Management Information Systems, 6(1), pp.59–85.
Witschge, T. & Nygren, G., 2009. Journalism: A profession under pressure? Journal of Media Business
     Studies, 6(1), pp.37–59.