   Agent Based Modeling of “Crowdinforming” as a Means of Load Balancing at Emergency Departments




    Agent Based Modeling of “Crowdinforming”

                  as a Means of Load Balancing

                     at Emergency Departments

                Ryan Neighbour , Luis Oppenheimer , Shamir N. Mukhi ,       1,3
                           Marcia R. Friesen , Robert D. McLeod    1

                             1
                              University of Manitoba
                             2Winnipeg Regional Health Authority
                             3Public Health Agency of Canada



Abstract

This work extends ongoing devel opment of a framework for model ing the spread of contact -

transmission infectious diseases. The framework is built upon Agent Based Modeling (ABM),
with emphasis on urban scale mo     delling integrated with institutional models of hospital
emergency departments. The method presented here includes ABM modeling an outbreak of
influenza-like illness (ILI) with concomitant surges at h ospital emergency departments, and
illustrates the pre   liminary modeling of        ‘crowdinforming’     as an intervention.
‘Crowdinforming’, a component of ‘crowdsourcing’, is characterized as the dissemination of

collected and processed information back to the ‘crowd’ via public access. The objective of the
simulation is to allow for effective policy evaluation to better inform the public of expected
wait times as part of their decision making process in attending an emergency department or
clinic. In effect, this is a means of providing additional decision support gar nered from a
simulation, prior to real world implementation. The conjecture is that more optimal service
delivery can be achieved under balanced patient loads, compared to situations where some

emergency departments are overextended while others are underutilized. Load balancing
optimization is a common notion in many operations      , and the simulation illustrates that
‘crowdinforming’ is a potential tool when used as a process control parameter to balance the
load at emergency departments as well as serving as an effective means to direct patients
during an ILI outbreak with temporary clinics deployed. The information provided in the
‘crowdinforming’ model is readily available in a local context, although it requires thoughtful

consideration in its interpretation. The extension to a wider dissemination of information via a
web service is readily achievable and presents no technical obstacles, although political
obstacles may be present . The ‘crowdinforming’ simulation is not limited to arrivals of
patients at emergency departments due to ILI; it applies equally to any scenarios where
patients arrive in any arrival pattern that may cause disparity in the waiting times at multiple
facilities.

Keywords—Contact Graphs, Agent Based Models, Infection Spread Models







                                                                                             1
        Online Journal of Public Health Informatics * ISSN 1947-2579 * http://ojphi.org0
   Agent Based Modeling of “Crowdinforming” as a Means of Load Balancing at Emergency Departments




Introduction

The worldwide H1N1 influenza pandemic (pH1N1) in 2009 and 2010 has mobilized and
renewed research attention to the many facets of infection control and impact, ranging from the

epidemiology of the illness, development and deployment of vaccines and other pharmaceutical
interventions, and public health and emergency management measures. Predicting how a             n
infection may spread within a population and the consequent impact that it may have includes
forecasting with intelligent models and rea l data, as well as back-casting based on available data
as one validation process. The focus of this paper is to present a computer simulation framework
(model) of an urban community to model the spread of pH1N1 in the community, in which the
model carries the capacity to model the impact of various intervention strategies, e.g. temporary

clinics, vaccination, chemoprophylaxis, hygienic and social distancing measures. The
intervention of direct interest in the present study is to provide the public with a      dditional
information related to expected waiting times at regional hospital emergency departments (EDs),
and its potential impact on patient loads and consequent service delivery.          A true metric
associated with estimating expected wait times at a particular hospital is a   random variable of
many factors and difficult to estimate even with extensive ED data. The work here demonstrates
the role that patient redirection can play if this metric were available. In the interim, we have

associated the number of pa     tients with a ‘ busyness’ metric that would be amenable for
presentation to the community. As the social dynamics and agent behaviours coupled with real
data (economic, cultural, and social) become better defined, the computer simulation naturally
allows one to focus on the population subsets and apply the framework to other jurisdictions.

The work is located within the larger context of healthcare informatics. The role of informatics in

healthcare re-engineering and optimization has become a new reality i        n efforts to improve
service delivery and efficiencies in healthcare. Both well vetted engineering approaches as well
as emerging methods are being applied to generate       solutions for health policy and decision
makers. New service delivery paradigms are developed and justified from a variety of domains,
including statistics, operations research and lean manufacturing concepts from industrial

engineering, and business models [1]-[5]. In healthcare, t he challenge is exacerbated by the
inherent unpredictability of social behaviour ; this contributes to the computational irreducibility
of the problems encountered within many healthcare environments. As a consequence , modeling
and simulation are playing a larger role as a design aid or tool in support of decision making [6]-

[9].

Background

The computer simulation framework is built, in       part, on an Agent -Based Model/Modeling
(ABM) approach. A central premise of this work is that ABMs – combined with real data and as

high a resolution (fidelity) as the computer system affords –   will create a new paradigm for a
better understanding of epidemiology within a social system dynamics, and thereby lead to more
effective tools for policy makers guiding the future. ABM is a relatively new approach to
disease modeling (10+ yrs), an area historically addressed by well-vetted mathematical modeling
techniques (70+ yrs). However, the use of ABM for simulating infection spread within an urban
area and built upon the incorporation of real data is only now emerging (2+ yrs). ABM is based

on simulating a collection of agents –      i.e. the people in the mode    l – in terms of their


                                                                                                  2
         Online Journal of Public Health Informatics * ISSN 1947-2579 * http://ojphi.org010
   Agent Based Modeling of “Crowdinforming” as a Means of Load Balancing at Emergency Departments




characteristics, behaviours, and interactions with other agents. Agents (people) are purposeful
and autonomous entities able to assess their situations, make decisions and compete with one
another. ABM’s conceptual depth is derived from its ability to model emergent behaviour that
may be counterintuitive, and to discern a complex behavioural whole that is greater than the sum

of its parts. Counterintuitive or counter intent behaviour may arise from non- obvious non-linear
feedback loops that may exacerbate system dynamics, such as financial incentives to remain
working while infected, or non- obvious pressures within the healthcare system that strain the
system to its breaking point. Complex behaviour that is greater than the sum of i ts parts may be
associated with an agent’s ability to learn or make heuristic         -based adaptations to their
behaviours. ABM provides a natural description of a system that can be calibrated and validated
by representative expert agents (healthcare specialists), and is flexible enough to be tuned to high

degrees of specificity (sensitivity) in agents’ behaviours and interactions. ABMs are particularly
well suited to system modeling in which agent behaviour is complex, non- linear, stochastic, and
may exhibit memory or path-dependence [10][11][12]. Early application areas of ABM include
logistics, economics, and transportation systems.

ABM also provides one of the most useful tools available in terms of knowledge transfer and
requirements capture, independent of whatever other techniques may also be employed. The

model construction forces ideas to be clarified; unclear and hidde n assumptions are exposed and
debated in a common and familiar lexicon, leading to the ABM having a direct correspondence
to the problem as understood by the practitioner and the developer. The resulting model closely
resembles the system description, whi      ch could come from business rules or some other
description by stakeholders who need not be overly familiar with ABM itself. Many ABMs are
developed to gain a better understanding of operations through the use of what -if scenarios, and

in doing so will provide a decision support tool to public health decision-makers.

A more recent and considerable area of application for ABMs has been country scale
(community-level) disease spread modeling in human populations [13][14]. The focus generally
constitutes large scale community -level epidemics of respiratory infections, as this is an
important public health and policy issue with far-ranging health and economic impacts. Our own
work has included the development of one of the first urban-      level epidemic proof -of-concept

ABMs, based on a paradigm of a ‘discrete space scheduled walker’ (DSSW)            [15]. The urban
scale ABM is one of the      most appropriate modeling levels in terms of incorporating high
resolution data (individual based), as well as for simulating social dynamics reinforced by
patterns of behaviour and readily available topographical data. The proof -of-concept is built on
synthesized data and a very limited range of agent parameters. It can model a medium          -sized
North American City using approximately 650,000 discrete agents (people), each of whom are
assigned a demographic profile and a weekly schedule on the topography of the City of

Winnipeg, Canada . Running the simulation with these types of numbers however is
computationally tasking for a reasonable desktop environment. The proof -of-concept was built
upon a conceptual framework of statistical reasoning (law of large numbers, statistical
mechanics) as well as a correct -by-construction bias, meaning that the system dynamics emerge
directly out of the agents’ characteristics and behaviours, rather than by the inclusion of artificial
small-world networks. The proof -of-concept addresses where, who, when, and what elements.

Where: underlying topographical (network / graph) data is extracted from map and search
engine utilities such as Google Earth, in order to build a network of objects, denoted institutions.



                                                                                                   3
         Online Journal of Public Health Informatics * ISSN 1947-2579 * http://ojphi.org 2010
   Agent Based Modeling of “Crowdinforming” as a Means of Load Balancing at Emergency Departments




Institutions are existing geographic locations such as homes, businesses, schools, leisure sites,
hospitals, airport, and transport vehicles. Who: Agents are people that make up a community,
and between whom an infection would be spread. When: a central premise of the DSSW-ABM
is that agents are primarily creatures of habit, operating on routine schedules with slight random

perturbations [16]. What: The factor of interest is the spread of the pH1N1 virus or other viruses
that cause respiratory infections among the population of agents, through agent -to-agent contact
associated with routine daily activities. Once infected, the agents probabilistically choose to stay
home for the duration of the infection or attend a hospital ED.

As an intervention, we have considered modeling the potential role of ‘        crowdinforming’ in
directing or governing an agent’s behaviour. The notion of ‘        crowdinforming’ is a natural

extension of ‘crowdsourcing’ [16], whereby data collected by crowdsourcing is again fed back to
the ‘crowd’ via public access. Low-tech examples of the role of ‘crowdinforming’ in modifying
human behaviour are readily available, such as line-       ups at vaccination clinics as vac   cine
shortages are announced in the mass media. While a fairly obvious intervention,
‘crowdinforming’ is a novel inclusion into the ABM and simulation.

Methods


The ABM engine is coded in C++, an Object Oriented Language. The object oriented approach
has natural extensions to the spatial modeling inherent in the spatial nature of the system under
study. Developing an ABM within an object oriented framework from the ground up provides
an additional degree of understanding the problem in contrast to using a more commercial

platform. The simulated world is a two        -dimensional (X, Y) discrete Cartesian world of
extremely high resolution. Building upon the proof-of-concept, the ABM is general purpose and
at present is a spatially directed ABM reflective of a specific topography – in this case, the City
of Winnipeg, Canada . Agents can access a limited number of features of other agents and
objects, which can be set by the programmer, depending on the model. They can also pass
messages to other agents in order to achieve interaction. The ABM houses institutions such as
hospitals, homes, malls, leisure facilities, schools, businesses, and transportation institutions such

as cars and public transport. Graphical inputs serve as defining location derived from maps     and
community planning documents. The ABM framework is illustrated in Fig.             1. The publicly
accessible information ‘dashboard’ is illustrated on the left -hand side, providing near real time
information on waiting times at various EDs        at hospitals within a   region. Currently, this
information is available in individual facilities’ waiting rooms; yet, for the present simulation it
is assumed to be web accessible to the general public via readily available web services. The web

services can include traditional web 2.0 applications supporting dynamic updating of web pages
based on new information from various facility waiting time estimates, as well as access via
traditional wired services to those offered over 3G cellular networks or ‘smart phones’.











                                                                                                  4
         Online Journal of Public Health Informatics * ISSN 1947-2579 * http://ojphi.org2010
   Agent Based Modeling of “Crowdinforming” as a Means of Load Balancing at Emergency Departments


















                 Fig. 1. The ABM framework encompassing various data sources.


  A. Modeling Surges at Hospitals

This section outlines the urban based ABM under conditions associated with an ILI outbreak in
Winnipeg, Canada. In the model, a parameterized distribution of households is associated with a
colour as a graphical input. For this scenario, various colours represent a number of multiple
person households uniformly distributed across Winnipeg, as shown in Fig. 2. At this scale, the
colours tend to blend although roads, rivers, a    nd other infrastructure and features are clearly

evident.
















                               Fig. 2. A screenshot of the ABM input.



A number of institutions such as schools, large businesses, restaurants, leisure institutes as well
as hospitals are modelled. The spread of infection is a stochastic process with the probability of
infection being directly related to social contact. Social contact can take place at home, work,
school, or on public transport, with institutions also having probabilities of contraction associated

with them. A baseline simulation involves scheduled agents being modelled, and as they become
ill, they probabilistically go to the closest ED . Once at the ED, another individual-based state or
phase model is introduced as illustrated in Fig.     3. At the ED , the agent may be discharged,



                                                                                                     5
         Online Journal of Public Health Informatics * ISSN 1947-2579 * http://ojphi.org, 2010
   Agent Based Modeling of “Crowdinforming” as a Means of Load Balancing at Emergency Departments



treated, or admitted. Once admitted, the patient may again undergo treatment and recover, or
alternatively the agent may not recover. The current institutional ED       model is quite simple but

could be extended and refined with a more detai led model as required, an example of which has
been developed by the authors [18][19].

















                    Fig. 3. The emergency department individual based model.


A statistic inst rumented during the simulation was the number of agents arriving at individual
hospital EDs. These surges are shown in Fig. 4 for the seven hospitals in the Winnipeg area.
















                Fig. 4. Simulated Surges at Winnipeg Hospitals during an Outbreak















                                                                                                      6
         Online Journal of Public Health Informatics * ISSN 1947-2579 * http://ojphi.org4, 2010
   Agent Based Modeling of “Crowdinforming” as a Means of Load Balancing at Emergency Departments

















            Fig. 5. Day of Week Variations at Winnipeg Hospitals during an Outbreak


 Fig. 4 illustrates a disparity between various hospitals   , corresponding to population density
variations with the city. Fig. 5 illustrates the variation within weekly routines or schedules. These
data are averaged over five runs. This averaging raises an interesting consideration from a policy
perspective: as the data is averaged , it tends to become smoother and may tends to mask short-
term variations that may otherwise be present and important to note in the physical environment

as well as the model.


Results: Self redirection


  B. ‘Crowdinfoming’ diversions


Although expected, reduced surges at hospital EDs         can reasonably be argued to facilitate
improved treatment and service efficiencies during an outbreak. These outcomes illuminated a
potential indirect intervention. The modelling initially planned for reactive   hospital diversions,
i.e. setting demarcation levels related to capacity to support diversion policy and redirection [20].
With recent interests in ‘ crowdsourcing’ [16] and as a means to aid in biosurveillance of
potential infection spread, the model was adapted to model the counterpoint of ‘ crowdsourcing’,

that being ‘crowdinforming.’ One of the fundamental tenets of ‘         crowdsourcing’ is that the
feedback loop needs to be closed, as information mined through crowdsourcing flows back to the
crowd that generated it, presumably to accrue benefit.

At present, one trial hospital in the Winnipeg Regional Health Authority (WRHA) jurisdiction
has an ED ‘dashboard’ in place, updating the number of patients waiting and their waiting times

in terms of maximum wait at various triage levels. The dashboard is inten      ded to inform those
already in the waiting room of    the anticipated wait before being seen. These dashboards are
derived from the WRHA Electronic Data Information System (EDIS) which was recently rolled
out across the WRHA hospitals. Our model develops this notion further and conjectures that in a
reasonably short period of time, this data could be made publicly         available through a web
service, such that an individual would be able to query the hospital ‘       dashboards’ from the

WRHA site over the internet with any browser, be it mobile cellular or wired, or made available



                                                                                                   7
         Online Journal of Public Health Informatics * ISSN 1947-2579 * http://ojphi.org 2010
   Agent Based Modeling of “Crowdinforming” as a Means of Load Balancing at Emergency Departments




via a community call centre such as a 311 service whereby a patient would call and enquire
about expected wait times.

For our modeling purposes, in this ‘crowdinforming’ scenario, a proactive decision is then made

by an agent seeking treatment at an ED. In addition to the stochastic process of deciding upon
going to an ED , each agent is also provided with estimates of wait times and the number of
patients waiting. This data is available and easily instrumented within the ABM.

As an illustration of our weighted fair redirecting, we assumed four hospitals with waits of 1, 2, 3
and 4 hours with travel times of 60 minutes, 45 minutes, 30 minutes, and 15 minutes, coarsely
extracted from topographical distances. An agent would create a roulette wheel to guide their

decision once they have elected to go to an ED   . The associated normalized probabilities
associated with informed self redirection are shown in Table 1.

            Table 1. Informed Emergency Department Self Redirect Probabilities

                                    ED    ED    ED3 ED4       Tot

                                     1     2                   al
                        Wait
                        Time         1     2      3     4
                        (hr)

                        Travel
                        Time         1    0.75   0.5   0.25
                        (hr)
                        Total
                                     2    2.75   3.5   4.25  12.5
                        Time
                        (hr)
                                          1/2.   1/3.  1/4.
                        1/over       ½     75     5     25   1.38

                        Probabili  0.36   0.26  0.20   0.17   1.0
                        ty                 4      7



Table 1 combines estimates of travel time and wait times in an additive manner. Alternatively, it

may be more appropriate to generate a total time as a linear combination weighted appropriately
as in (1).

                    Total Time =                                 ((1)aitingTime) + (TravelTime)

Using such a method, the agents make a probabilistic decision weighted by the least anticipated
wait. As a consequence, the overall surge seen at hospitals is dampened by the behaviour of

informed individuals. Modeling the ‘crowdinformed’ load-balancing results in surges at hospital
as shown in Fig. 6, which was derived with              equal to zero.




                                                                                         8
        Online Journal of Public Health Informatics * ISSN 1947-2579 * http://ojphi.org
   Agent Based Modeling of “Crowdinforming” as a Means of Load Balancing at Emergency Departments


















                  Fig. 6. Surges at Winnipeg Hospitals with ‘crowdinforming’.



Crowdinforming appears to f ilter the simulated patient surges. A simple statistical measure
associated with mean and variance indicates that the load balancing is statistically significant
given our behavioural assumptions, where a known estimated wait time probabilistically
influences a person’s decision in attending a particular ED. The overall effect was expected to be
that of a low pass filter smoothing out the peaks and valleys in both space and time. Fig. 6
clearly illustrates filtering in space as each ED   roughly serves the s ame number of patients

within a few percent. Filtering in time is expected to result from incorporation of an estimate of
travel time as indicated in Equation 1. This simulation illustrates load balancing at the cost of
greater variance in the patient load over time. This type of emergent behaviour inherently has
greater information content than anticipated or expected results. While the simulation results are
presently a coarse approximation of a policy implementation, they serve as an indication of
possible trends and side effects.


As a further extension, the additions of temporary clinics were     also modeled. The temporary
clinics were modeled as being available provided sufficient    staff resources existed to off -load
EDs during a serious influenza outbreak. In this case, hospitals were augmented with temporary
clinics and the public was informed of their location and services. Temporary clinics are
modelled as being staffed with and providing a level of service similar to a hospital ED. In the

following simulation, six temporary facilities were instantiated in highly populated postal code
areas. Given the model of the information provided to the public, the consequent balancing of
loads at hospital EDs and temporary clinics are seen to be balanced . Fig. 7 also demonstrates the
effect of prioritizing travel in the decision-making process (Fig. 7 is derived with               equal to 0.5)
with 80% of infected agents seeking treatment. In addition, acute patients are modeled as not
presenting themselves at a clinic but rather deciding to directly attend an ED. An additional

modification is that the tempora ry clinics are more heavily recommended once hospitals near
capacity, or alternately that hospitals are preferred destinations until they are near capacity.








                                                                                                  9
         Online Journal of Public Health Informatics * ISSN 1947-2579 * http://ojphi.org010
   Agent Based Modeling of “Crowdinforming” as a Means of Load Balancing at Emergency Departments



















             Fig. 7. Surges at Winnipeg Hospitals and Clinics with ‘crowdinforming’.



 An additional param eter of interest was the location     of temporary clinics. For the simulation
above, the clinics were located in central and highly populated postal code areas. The simulation
allows for one to vary the location of clinics , such that they may better serve a community or
region.

 Fig. 8 illustrates a simulation run without averaging over multiple runs (which carries the effect
of averaging over multiple days) . Without averaging, the day to day variations are clearly
apparent. If this variability  were to be an    actual consequence of the patient self redirection
policy, it may be that the increase in day to day variation would not be a reasonable trade -off for
a balanced load. It is these types of insights that ABM and what -if scenarios provide for policy

makers a-priori to policy implementation.



















                             Fig. 8. Hospital Loads without averaging.






                                                                                                     10
         Online Journal of Public Health Informatics * ISSN 1947-2579 * http://ojphi.org4, 2010
   Agent Based Modeling of “Crowdinforming” as a Means of Load Balancing at Emergency Departments




Discussion


Although preliminary, this work represents one of the first modelled instances of the potential of
‘crowdinforming’ in providing a policymaker with a simulation to assist in public health decision
support. In doing so, t his work illustrated the role that an ABM can play in developing policy
decision support systems. The model presented here illustrates how one specific intervention –
that of proactive information   dissemination or ‘crowdinforming’ – can provide a degree of
patient load balancing at ED s. A similar model was constructed corresponding to the scenario
where sufficient public health resources existed for the deployment of temporary clinics. In the

event of the temporary clinics , the model also allows for an investigation into their utilization
where the public would be informed of their location and services.

The findings are somewhat self -evident in that the model for ‘ crowdinforming’ contributed to
load balancing at individual hospital  EDs. The findings also indicate that the location of the
clinics is reasonably important in off -loading EDs. The most significant limitations associated
with research of this nature is that stochastic models of behaviour  have to be estimated. Other

shortcomings are associated with the access and usability of real data. These latter barriers are
technological, while the former are theoretical. The validity of the underlying ABM framework
is enhanced as the characterization of agents and their behaviours is improved and refined with
additional real data. Consequently, barriers to access and usability of real data –      whether
technological or political – are limitations to the work. A more significant deficit in the model is
that the deployment of temporary clinics assumes that the resources exist for staffing and

treatment.

Summary


The work presented here allows a policy for patient directed redirection to be simulated, adding a
qualitative assessment to a model that may ot herwise be experiential or best-intent. This work is
one of the first demonstrations of the ‘ crowdsourcing’ intervention, and it demonstrates the role
an ABM and similar technologies will continue to play in the future.
  .

Acknowledgments


The authors acknowledge Maciej Borkowski, Marek Laskowski, and Bryan Demianyk for early
developments of the ABM framework. The authors also acknowledge Manitoba Hydro for

financial support.

Correspondence:


Bob McLeod
University of Manitoba
mcleod@ee.umanitoba.ca





                                                                                               11
         Online Journal of Public Health Informatics * ISSN 1947-2579 * http://ojphi.org10
   Agent Based Modeling of “Crowdinforming” as a Means of Load Balancing at Emergency Departments



References



[1] Marshall A, Burns L. A Bayesian network hybrid model for representing accident and
    emergency waiting times. Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Computer-Based Medical
    Systems. June 2007; 91-96.

[2] Komashie A, Mousavi A. Modeling emergency departments using discr ete event simulation
    techniques. Proceedings of the Winter Simulation Conference. Dec. 2005; 2681-2685.
[3] Patrick J, Puterman M. Reducing wait times through operations research: Optimizing the use
    of surge capacity. Healthcare Quarterly, 2008;11(3): 77-83.
[4] Khurma N, Bacioiu G, Pasek Z. Simulation-based verification of lean improve ment for
    emergency room process. Proceedings of the Winter Simulation Conference. Dec 2008;1490-

    1499.
[5] McNulty    T, Re -engineering Health Care: The Complexities of O               rganizational
    Transformation, New York, Oxford University Press, 2002.
[6] Kanagarajah A, Lindsay P, Miller A, Parker D. An exploration into the uses of agent -based
    modeling to improve quality of health care. International Conference on Complex Systems .
    June 2006; 1-10.

[7] Gunal M, Pidd M. Simulation modelling for perform ance measurement in healthcare.
    Proceedings of the Winter Simulation Conference, Dec. 2005; 2663 - 2668.
[8] Blachowicz D, Christiansen J, Ranginani A, Simunich K. How to determine future HER
    ROI: Agent -based modeling and simulation offers a new alternative to traditional
    techniques, J. Healthcare Information Management. Winter 2008;22(1):39-45.
[9] Gunal M, Pidd M. Understanding accident and emergency departmen t performance using
                                     th
    simulation. Proceedings of the 38 conference on Winter simulation, 2006;446-452.
[10]   Bonabeau E. Agent -based modeling: Methods and techniques for simulating human
    systems. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science. May 2002        [Online]. 99(Suppl
    3), pp. 7280-7287. Available: http://www.pnas.org/content/99/suppl.3/7280.full#xref-ref-3-
    1
[11]   Epstein J. Modelling to contain pandemics. Nature. 2009:460;687.

[12]   Hupert N, Xiong W, Mushlin A. The virtue of virtuality: The promise of agent -based
    epidemic modeling,” Translational Research. 2008:151(6):273-274.
[13]   Epstein J. Artificial society: Getting clues on how a pandemic might happen by creating
    a h uge model of the United States,     The Brookings Institution. [Online]. Available:
    www.brookings.edu/interviews/2008/0402_agent_based_epstein.aspx.
[14]   Merler S, Ajelli M, Jurman G, Furlanello C, Rizzo C., Bella A, Massari M, Ciofi degli

    Atti M. Modeling influenza pandemic in Italy: An individual     -based approach. The 2007
    intermediate conference of the Italian Statistical Society. June 200           7. Available
    http://www.sis-statistica.it/files/pdf/atti/SIS%202007%20Venezia%20intermedio_121-
    131.pdf
[15]   M. Borkowski M, Podaima B, McLeod R., Epidemic modeling with discrete space
    scheduled walkers: Possible extensions to HIV/AIDS,” BMC Public Health, vol. 9 (Suppl 1):

    S14, 2009. [Online}. Available: doi:10.1186/1471-2458-9-S1-S14.
[16]   Song, C, Qu Z, Blumm N, Barabási A. Limits of Predictability in Human Mobility,
    Science, 2010 327(5968);1018-1021.




                                                                                              12
         Online Journal of Public Health Informatics * ISSN 1947-2579 * http://ojphi.org10
   Agent Based Modeling of “Crowdinforming” as a Means of Load Balancing at Emergency Departments



[17]   Howe       J, The Rise of Crowdsourcing.                      Wired.      June 2006,
    http://www.wired.com/wired/archive/14.06/crowds.html.
[18]   Laskowski M, Borkowski M, Demianyk B, Friesen M, McLeod R. The utility of agent-

    based models for healthcare applications,” The Second IASTED International Conference on
    Telehealth and Assistive Technology, Cambridge, MA, Nov. 2009.
[19]   Laskowski M, McLeod R,Friesen M, Podaima B, Alfa A., Models of emergency
    departments for reduci ng patient waiting times. PLoS ONE,. 2009;4( 70: e6127. [Online].
    Available: doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0006127, 2009.
[20]   Mukhi S, Laskowski M, Agent-based simulation of emergency depa rtments with patient

    diversion. Electronic Healthcare, D. Weerasinghe, Ed. Berlin: Springer. 2009;25-37.


   doi: 10.5210/ojphi.v2i3.3225

   Cite this item as: McLeod, B. 2010 Dec 23. Agent Based Modeling of “Crowdinforming” as
   a Means of Load Balancing at Emergency Departments. Online Journal of Public Health
   Informatics [Online] 2(3):e4.






































                                                                                              13
        Online Journal of Public Health Informatics * ISSN 1947-2579 * http://ojphi.org10