
Crowdsourcing Geographic Knowledge

Editorsui  SarahElwood  MichaelGoodchild



Crowdsourcing Geographic

Knowledge

Volunteered Geographic Information (VGI)
in Theory and Practice
Editors
Daniel Sui                                        Sarah Elwood
Department of Geography                           Department of Geography
Centre for Urban & Regional Analysis              University of Washington

The Ohio State University                         Seattle, WA, USA
Columbus, OH, USA

Michael Goodchild
Department of Geography

College of Letters & Science
University of California
Santa Barbara, CA, USA


















ISBN 978-94-007-4586-5                ISBN 978-94-007-4587-2 (eBook)
DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-4587-2
Springer Dordrecht Heidelberg New York London


Library of Congress Control Number: 2012945073

© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part of
the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation,
broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information
storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology
now known or hereafter developed. Exempted from this legal reservation are brief excerpts in connection
with reviews or scholarly analysis or material supplied speciﬁcally for the purpose of being entered and
executed on a computer system, for exclusive use by the purchaser of the work. Duplication of this
publication or parts thereof is permitted only under the provisions of the Copyright Law of the Publisher’s
location, in its current version, and permission for use must always be obtained from Springer. Permissions
for use may be obtained through RightsLink at the Copyright Clearance Center. Violations are liable to
prosecution under the respective Copyright Law.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication
does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.

While the advice and information in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of
publication, neither the authors nor the editors nor the publisher can accept any legal responsibility for
any errors or omissions that may be made. The publisher makes no warranty, express or implied, with
respect to the material contained herein.

Printed on acid-free paper

Springer is part of Springer Science+Business Media (www.springer.com)
    This book is dedicated to the countless
volunteers who have contributed time and
effort to mapping the world in unprecedented
detail, and to making the results freely
available to all.

  Acknowledgement














The editors would like to gratefully acknowledge the research support from Nick
Crane and Wenqin Chen at Ohio State, Agnieszka Leszczysnki and Matt Wilson at UW,
and Alan Glennon and Linna Li at UCSB for their assistance for this edited volume.
































                                                                       vii

 Contents















 1 Volunteered Geographic Information, the Exaﬂood,
     and the Growing Digital Divide .........................................1...................
     Daniel Sui, Michael Goodchild, and Sarah Elwood


Part I Public Participation and Citizen Science

 2 Understanding the Value of VGI ..........................................15...............
     Rob Feick and Stéphane Roche

 3 To Volunteer or to Contribute Locational Information?
     Towards Truth in Labeling for Crowdsourced
     Geographic Information ................................................31.......................

     Francis Harvey
 4 Metadata Squared: Enhancing Its Usability for Volunteered

     Geographic Information and the GeoWeb .................................43........
     Barbara S. Poore and Eric B. Wolf
 5 Situating the Adoption of VGI by Government .............................65....

     Peter A. Johnson and Renee E. Sieber
 6 When Web 2.0 Meets Public Participation GIS (PPGIS):

     VGI and Spaces of Participatory Mapping in China ......................83...
     Wen Lin
 7 Citizen Science and Volunteered Geographic Information:

     Overview and Typology of Participation ...............................105............
     Muki Haklay








                                                                            ix
x                                                                      Contents


Part II Geographic Knowledge Production and Place Inference

 8 Volunteered Geographic Information

     and Computational Geography: New Perspectives ............................. 125
     Bin Jiang

 9 The Evolution of Geo-Crowdsourcing: Bringing Volunteered
     Geographic Information to the Third Dimension .........................139....
     Marcus Goetz and Alexander Zipf

10 From Volunteered Geographic Information
     to Volunteered Geographic Services ....................................161...............
     Jim Thatcher

11 The Geographic Nature of Wikipedia Authorship ...........................175.
     Darren Hardy

12 Inferring Thematic Places from Spatially
     Referenced Natural Language Descriptions ..............................201........
     Benjamin Adams and Grant McKenzie

13 “I Don’t Come from Anywhere”: Exploring the Role
     of the Geoweb and Volunteered Geographic Information

     in Rediscovering a Sense of Place in a Dispersed
     Aboriginal Community ..................................................223......................
     Jon Corbett


Part III Emerging Applications and New Challenges

14 Potential Contributions and Challenges of VGI
     for Conventional Topographic Base-Mapping Programs.................... 245
     David J. Coleman

15 “We Know Who You Are and We Know Where You Live”:
     A Research Agenda for Web Demographics ........................................ 265

     T. Edwin Chow
16 Volunteered Geographic Information,

     Actor-Network Theory, and Severe-Storm Reports ............................ 287
     Mark H. Palmer and Scott Kraushaar

17 VGI as a Compilation Tool for Navigation Map Databases ................  307
     Michael W. Dobson

18 VGI and Public Health: Possibilities and Pitfalls................................. 329
     Christopher Goranson, Sayone Thihalolipavan,
     and Nicolás di Tada
Contents                                                                           xi


19 VGI in Education: From K-12 to Graduate Studies ............................   341
     Thomas Bartoschek and Carsten Keßler

20 Prospects for VGI Research and the Emerging
     Fourth Paradigm .............................................................361.....................

     Sarah Elwood, Michael F. Goodchild, and Daniel Sui

Biographies of the Editors and Contributors .....................................377.......

Index ............................................................................387..................................

   Chapter 1

Volunteered Geographic Information,

   the Exa ﬂ ood, and the Growing Digital Divide



   Daniel Sui      ,   Michael    Goodchild    , and   Sarah Elwood









 AbstracTt he phenomenon of volunteered geographic information is part of a
profound transformation on how geographic data, information, and knowledge are
produced and circulated. This chapter begins by situating this transition within the
broader context of an “exaﬂood” of digital data growth. It considers the implications

of VGI and the exaﬂood for further time-space compression and new forms and
degrees of digital inequality. We then give a synoptic overview of the content of this
edited collection and its three-part structure: VGI, public participation, and citizen
science; geographic knowledge production and place inference; and emerging
applications and new challenges. We conclude this chapter by discussing the

renewed importance of geography and the role of crowdsourcing for geographic
knowledge production.



     1.1     Introduction


The past 5 years have witnessed a profound transformation of how geographic data,
information, and, more broadly, knowledge have been produced and disseminated
due to the phenomenal growth of a plethora of related technologies loosely known




  D. Sui) (
  Department of Geography, The Ohio State University, Columbus , OH , USA
e-mail: sui.10@osu.edu
  M.   Goodchild
Department of Geography, University of California at Santa Barbara,
 Santa Barbara , CA , USA
e-mail: good@geog.ucsb.edu

  S. Elwood
  Department of Geography, University of Washington , Seattle , WA , USA
e-mail: selwood@u.washington.edu


D. Sui et al. (eds.), Crowdsourcing Geographic Knowledge: Volunteered Geographic
Information (VGI) in Theory and Practice, DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-4587-2_1,
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
2                                                                               D. Sui et al.


as Web 2.0, cloud computing, and cyberinfrastructure. Although different lexicons
have surfaced to describe this new trend by different communities, ranging from
crowdsourcing to user-generated content, from Geoweb to the semantic Web, from

volunteered geographic information to neogeography, PostGIS, citizen science, and
eScience, the general idea coalesces around the use of the Internet to create, share,

and analyze geographic information via multiple computing devices/platforms
(traditional desktops, iPads, or smart phones).
    Ever since the term volunteered geographic information (VGI) ofﬁcially appeared

in the literature (Goodchild  2007), there have been meetings and workshops devoted
to the topic, including (to our knowledge) the 2007 NCGIA VGI workshop,                    1
the AutoCarto 2008 workshop, the USGS 2010 VGI workshop,                  3the GIScience
                      4                                              5
2010 VGI workshop, and the 2011 VGI Pre-Conference at AAG.Scholarly literature
has also grown signiﬁcantly, as evidenced by several special issues devoted exclu       eliv
to the theme of VGI in GeoJournal (Elwood 2008a, b )J,ournal of Location-Based

Servicesspecial VGI issue (Rana and Joliveau 2009 ) , anG          deomatica(Feick and
Roche 2010). In addition to these special issues devoted to VGI, research related to
VGI has also been reported by an interdisciplinary group of researchers (Bennett

2010; Hall et al. 2010; Newman et al. 2010; Newsam 2010; Ramm and Topf 2010 ;
Warf and Sui 2010; Kessler 2011; Obe and Hsu 2011; Roche et al. 2011 ) .
   The goal of this edited volume is to take stock of recent advances in VGI research,

with particular emphasis on the role of VGI as crowdsourced data for geographic
knowledge production. By doing so, we plan not only to present a state-of-the-art
view of VGI as a research area but also to discuss the prospects and directions of

VGI research in the near future. More than half of the chapters in this volume
were based upon papers originally presented during the pre-AAG conference we

organized on “Volunteered Geographic Information (VGI): Research progress and
new developments” on April 11, 2011, in Seattle, Washington. We also solicited
additional contributions to cover topics not adequately addressed at the Seattle

conference but crucial for future VGI research.
   The rest of this introductory chapter is organized as follows. We ﬁrst situate the
phenomenon of VGI in the broader context of the big-data wave, also known as the

exaﬂood. We then discuss the increasing digital divide and uneven practices of VGI
across the world, followed by a synoptic overview of other chapters in this book. We
end this chapter by discussing the role of crowdsourcing in geographic knowledge

production and the evolving role of GIScience and geography in the era of big data
in achieving a better understanding of the world.






 http://www.ncgia.ucsb.edu/projects/vgi (accessed February 16, 2012).
 http://mapcontext.com/autocarto/web/AutoCarto2008.html (accessed February 16, 2012).
 3
 http://cegis.usgs.gov/vgi (accessed February 16, 2012).
 http://www.ornl.gov/sci/gist/workshops/agenda.shtml (accessed February 16, 2012).
 http://vgi.spatial.ucsb.edu (accessed February 16, 2012).
1  Volunteered Geographic Information, the Exaﬂood, and the Growing Digital Divide    3


   1.2      VGI and the Exa ﬂ ood of Big Data


Until recently, the geospatial community has had a rather narrow deﬁnition of what
is considered geographic data or information, often heavily inﬂuenced by the legacy
of traditional cartography. But rapid advances in a plethora of technologies – GPS,
smart phones, sensor networks, cloud computing, etc., especially all of the tech-

nologies loosely called Web 2.0 – have radically transformed how geographic data
are collected, stored, disseminated, analyzed, visualized, and used. This trend is
best reﬂected in Google’s mantra that “Google Maps=Google in Maps” (Ron          2008 ) .
The insertion of an “in” between Google and Maps perhaps signiﬁes one of the most

fundamental changes in the history of human mapping efforts. Nowadays, users can
search though Google Maps not only for traditional spatial/map information but
also for almost any kind of digital information (such as Wikipedia entries, Flickr

photos, YouTube videos, and Facebook/Twitter postings) as long as it is geotagged.
Furthermore, in contrast to the traditional top-down authoritative process ofg  greaophic
data production by government agencies, citizens have played an increasin    iglyortant
role in producing geographic data of all kinds through a bottom-up crowdsourcing

process. As a result, we now have massive amounts of geocoded data growing on a
daily basis from genetic to global levels covering almost everything we can think of
on or near the Earth’s surface, on the average of 1 exabyte per day (Swanson2007 ) .

For theﬁrst time in human history, we now have the capability to keep track of
where everything is in real time.
   Due to the ubiquity of information-sensing mobile devices, aerial sensory tech-
nologies (remote sensing), software logs, cameras, RFID (radio-frequency

identiﬁcation) readers, wireless sensor networks, and other types of data-gathering
devices, 1–5 exabytes (1 exabyte=10 bytes) of data are created daily and 90% of
the data in the world today were created within the past 2 years (MacIve2010 ) . The
amount of data humanity creates is doubling every 2 years; 2010 is the ﬁrst year that
                            21       6
we reached 1 zettabyte (10     bytes).2011 alone generated approximately 1.8 zetta-
bytes of data. The explosive growth of big data is rapidly transforming all aspects of
governments, businesses, education, and science. By 2020, the volume of the

world’s data will increase by 50 times from today’s volume (Gantz and Reinsel
2011). We will need 75 times more IT-related infrastructure in general and ten times
more servers to handle the new data. Metaphors of data storage have evolved from
bank to warehouse, to portal, and now to cloud. Data storage cost has dropped

dramatically during the past two decades. Between 2005 and 2011 alone, costs of
storage dropped by 5/6. Not surprisingly, how to deal with the new reality of big
data is on the top of the agenda of government, industry, and multiple disciplines in

the academy (IWGDD 2009; CORDIS 2010; Manyika et al. 2011 ) .


 We are aware of the inconsistencies in the estimated volume of data available so far, but we found

remarkable similarities in the ma2nitude and range of digital data volumes. In the chapter, we
relied on data primarily from EMC : http://www.emc.com/leadership/programs/digital-universe.
htm (accessed February 16, 2012).
4                                                                          D. Sui et al.


   Although it is a challenging task to estimate the precise volume of geospatial data
out there, we can safely say geospatial data is becoming an important part of the
big-data torrent. Geospatial information in general and VGI in particular should be

understood in the context of big data, and indeed, crowdsourcing, the Internet of
things, and big data are rapidly converging in the domain of geospatial technologies
(Ball 2011). Of course, due to rapid technological advances, what is considered as big
vs. small is a moving target. In the McKinsey report (Manyika et al2 .011 ) , “personal
location data” has been singled out as one of the ﬁve primary big-data streams. With

approximately 600 billion transa15ions per day, various mobile devices are creating
approximately one petabyte (10 bytes) of data per year globally. Personal location
data alone is a $100-billion business for service providers and $700 billion to end
users (Manyika et al. 2011). The other four streams of big data identiﬁed by the
McKinsey Institute – health care, public-sectoardministration, retail, andmanufactur-

ing – also have a signiﬁcant amoun otf data either geocoded oreotagged. So geospatial
data are not only an important component of big data but are actually, to a large
extent, big data themselves. For the geospatial community, big data presents not
only bigger opportunities for the business community (Francic2  a011; Killpack2011 )
but also new challenges for the scienti ﬁc and scholarly communities to conduct

ground-breaking studies related to people (at both individuaald collective levels) and
environment (from local to global scale) (Elkus2011; Meek2011; Hayes2012 ) .
   In fact, the geospatial community was tackling big-data issues even before “big
data” became trend (Miller2010). From very early on, geospatial technologies were
at the forefront of big-data challenges, primarily due to the large volumes of raster

(remote-sensing imagery) and vector (detailed property surveys) data that need to
be stored and managed. Back in 1997 when Microsoft Research initiated a pilot
project to demonstrate database scalability, they used aerial imagery as the primary
data (Ball 2011). The TerraServer Microsoft developed then is still in use and func-

tional today and set the standard and protocol for today’s other remote-sensing
image serving sites such as OpenTopography.org (LiDAR data). Furthermore, to
implement Al Gore’s (1999) vision of a “digital earth” requires big data. Although
the concept of digital earth did not evolve quite as Gore envisioned during the
past decade, the growing popularity of Google Earth, Microsoft’s Virtual Earth

(now Bing Maps), and NASA’s World Wind is an indication that geospatial and
mapping tools are crucial for users to navigate through the big-data torrent.



   1.3      VGI in Shrinking and Divided World


As a concomitant growth of this ever-expanding digital universe ﬁlled with big data,
the world (people, made objects and things, and environment) is increasingly being
recorded, referenced, and connected by vast digital networks. Geographers, along

with scholars in multiple other disciplines, have noted the acceleration of our emral
experience and the reduction of the role ofdistance for quite some time,as evidenced
by the scholarly literature on time-space compression, time-space distanciation, or
1  Volunteered Geographic Information, the Exaﬂood, and the Growing Digital Divide 5



  North America                                                           78.3%

      Oceania/
                                                             60.1%
      Australia

        Europe                                             58.3%

 Latin America /                           37.0%
 Caribbean

    Middle East                         31.7%


    World, Avg.                       30.2%


          Asia                    23.8%


         Africa          11.4%

              0     10%     20%    30%     40%    50%    60%     70%    80%     90%

                                        Penetration Rate

 Fig. 1.1World internet penetration rate by geographic regioht(tp://www.internetworldstats.
com/stats.htm



space-time convergence (Warf 2008). The growing popularity of social media on
the global scene has pushed time-space compression to new levels.

   Using a more popular term, the world is rapidly becoming smaller as a result of
space-time convergence. When social psychologist Stanley Milgram (1967 ) did his

experiment back in the 1960s on how many meaningful steps are needed to connect
two strangers on the surface of the Earth, Milgram and his team (Travers and
Milgram 1969) concluded then that on average it takes six steps to make a meaning-

ful connection for two randomly selected indviiduals, later popularized assix degrees
of separation by American playwright Paul Guare (in his 1990 play “Six Degrees of

Separation”) and the game Six Degrees of Kevin Bacon (to connect people with
Hollywood stars). In December 2011, Facebook and Yahoo! conducted a new an       ysils

using the massive amount of data harvested from social media, and they concluded
that six degrees of separation had been reduced to 4.7 by the end of 2011, largely as
                                                        7
a result of people being increasingly connected on-line.
   Almost paradoxically, as some parts of the world areﬂooded by big data and

people are increasingly connected in a shrinking world, we must also be keenly
aware that this world remains a deeply divided one – both physically and digitally

(Fig.1.1). While a large majority of people in North America and Europe have access
to the Internet (with Internet penetration rates at 78.3% and 58.3%, respectively, by
the end of 2011), two-thirds of humanity do not have access to the rapidly expanding

digital world; the world average Internet penetration rate is 30.2% with Asia (23.8%)


 7
 http://www.physorg.com/news/2011–11-degrees.html (accessed February 16, 2012).
6                                                                             D. Sui et al.

and Africa (11.4%) trailing at the bottom.     8The geographical distribution of new

digital data stored in 2010 reﬂects both the digital divide and uneven development
levels across the globe, with the developed world or global north (North America and
Europe) having 10–70 times more data than the developing world or global south

(Africa, Latin America, and Asia) (Manyika et al.2011). A third of humanity (about
two billion people) still lives on under $2 a day.   9We should also be mindful that
sometimes simply having access to gadgets themselves is not enough. Many iPhone

users in the developed world have enjoyed using one of multiple versions of restroom
locators (e.g., have2p), but for a country like India, where there are more cell phones
than toilets, simply having have2p installed on one’s iPhone would not help much in
rural areas due to the severe lack of sanitary infrastructure.10

   In the context of geographic information (and to some extent other types of data
as well), the biggest irony remains that Murphy’s law is still at work – information
is usually the least available where it is most needed. We have witnessed this paradox

unfolding painfully in front of our eyes in the Darfur crisis in northern Sudan (2006),
the aftermath of the Haiti earthquake (2010), and the BP explosion in the Gulf of
Mexico (2011). Undoubtedly, how to deal with big data in a shrinking and divided

world will be a major challenge for GIS and geography in the years ahead. The
strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats (SWOT) of VGI for improving the
spatial data infrastructure (SDI) are quite different in the two global contexts of
north and south (Genovese and Roche 2010). Furthermore, as Gilbert and Masucci

 (2011) show so clearly in their recent work on uneven information and communica-
tion geographies, we must move away from the traditional, linear conceptualization
of a digital divide, concerned primarily with physical access to computers and the

Internet. Instead, we must consider the multiple divides within cyberspace (or digital
apartheid) by taking into account the hybrid, scattered, ordered, and individualized
nature of cyberspaces (Graham 2011). Indeed, multiple hidden social and political
factors are at play for determining what is or is not available on-line (Engler and

Hall 2007). Internet censorship (Warf 2011; MacKinnon 2012), power laws (or the
so-called 80/20 rule) (Shirkey 2006), homophile tendencies in human interactions
(de Laat 2010 ; Merri ﬁ eld   2011), and fears of colonial and imperial dominance

(Bryan2010) are also important factors toconsider for the complexpatterns ofdigital
divide and uneven practices of VGI at multiple scales on the global scene.



   1.4       Overview of Chapters in This Book


This book is organized into 20 chapters. Chapter 1by the editors situates VGI in the
broader context of big data and the growing global digital divide. The substantive

chapters (2–19) are grouped in three parts.


 http://www.internetworldstats.com/stats2.htm (accessed February 16, 2012).
 http://givewell.org/international/technical/additional/Standard-of-Living (accessed February 16, 2012).
 1 0
  http://www.globalpost.com/dispatch/india/100507/mobile-phones-toilets-sanitation-health
(accessed February 16, 2012).
1  Volunteered Geographic Information, the Exaﬂood, and the Growing Digital Divide 7


   The six chapters in Part I focus on VGI, public participation, and citizen science.
In Chap. 2 , Rob Feick and Stéphane Roche extend our conceptualization of the
value of VGI and geographic information(GI) more generally.The authorsrecognize

that the proliferation of VGI has complicated our assessments of GI’s value. They
review these complications in their speciﬁcity and propose several new metaphors,
such as unexpected discoveries, Debord’s “dérives,” or Lego blocks, which might be
used as a guide for future valuation of VGI. Chapter 3by Francis Harvey questions
whether “volunteered” completely captures the character of crowdsourced data. The

author suggests that crowdsourced data can be disaggregated into categories of
“volunteered” and “contributed.” The distinction between CGI and VGI is argued to
be important for assessing particular crowdsourced data’sﬁtness for use and for
identifying biases or inaccuracies. In Chap. 4, Barbara Poore and Eric Wolf track
the changing discourse on geospatial metadata and – through two case studies –

point to ongoing transformations in popular and academic engagement with
metadata in the Geoweb. The authors suggest that we are in the midst of a shift and
indeed promote a shift, from traditional unidirectional construction of metadata to
more interactive user-friendly production of metadata. Chapter 5by Peter Johnson
and Renee Sieber contextualizes VGI somewhat differently, focusing on the vicissi-

tudes of its adoption by government for interaction with citizens. Through reﬂection
on their work with government agencies in Québec, the authors identify the different
ways that VGI has been incorporated and discuss key obstacles to and constraints
on further incorporation. In Chap. 6, Wen Lin examines the politics of citizen par-
ticipation and processes of subjectiﬁcation that are now emerging from the encounter

of Web 2.0 and public participation GIS (PPGIS). The author works with reference
to a case study in China, with three speciﬁc examples of VGI mapping drawn from
ethnographicﬁeldwork. Out of a meeting of Web 2.0 and PPGIS have emerged
transformations in Chinese citizenship and new spaces of citizen participation.

Finally, as a contribution to the disaggregation of the umbrella term “VGI,” and also
as a challenge to the exclusivity of a professionalized science that would marginalize
voluntary (nonprofessional) practitioners, Chap. 7by Muki Haklay discusses the
speciﬁcity, historical trajectory, social context, power relations within, and promise
of citizen science .

   The six chapters in Part II concentrate on geographic knowledge production
and place inference. With an interest in the opportunities generated by the ﬂood of
publicly available VGI, Chap. 8by Bin Jiang contextualizes computational geog-
raphy and reviews recent work in the ﬁeld to demonstrate the promise of research
that engages with big data. Jiang’s discussion of topological thinking also clariﬁes

the challenge that contemporary computational geography presents to conven-
tional views of space. In Chap. 9, Marcus Goetz and Alexander Zipf attend to the
transformation of VGI from its early basis in two-dimensional geographical infor-
mation to its contemporary inclusion of three-dimensional (3D) data. Through
speciﬁc attention to OpenStreetMap, Goetz and Zipf emphasize emerging appli-

cations of 3D data for city modeling and building modeling. Chapter        10by Jim
Thatcher engages with “volunteered geographic services” (VGS), the term he
uses to describe discrete actions made possible through spatially aware mobile
devices like smart phones. Thatcher suggests that VGS pushes beyond the limits
8                                                                         D. Sui et al.


of VGI by linking users through time and space and facilitating coordination of
actions on the ground. Thatcher reviews possible uses of VGS in crisis response
through the example of the PSUMobile.org. Chapter       11by Darren Hardy exam-

ines the geography of VGI authorship, focusing speciﬁcally on the case of
Wikipedia and its geographic articles. Exemplifying the analysis of big data, the
author describes a study of 32 million contributions to those articles over 7 years.
Contradicting assertions of the Internet’s placelessness, Hardy ﬁnds that author-
ship of Wikipedia articles demonstrates distance decay. In Chap.      12, Benjamin

Adams and Grant McKenzie draw together geographical insights on sense of
place and techniques of computational representation, specﬁ ially latent
Dirichlet allocation (LDA). The authors discuss topic modeling with VGI on
travel blogs with an eye to identifying places with topics, calculating similarity
between places, and evaluating changes in sense of place using computational

methods. Chapter     13is also concerned with the social relations of scientiﬁc
practice: Jon Corbett writes of VGI in the context of a collaborative mapping
project. Discussing his work with an aboriginal community, Corbett indicates that
participatory mapping can cultivate a sense of place but that such collaborative
projects demand reﬂexivity on the part of researchers.

   The six chapters in Part III cover emerging applications and new challenges. In
Chap. 14 , David J. Coleman engages with underlying assumptions about VGI
through consideration of conventional digital topographic mapping programs. It
is argued that the updating and maintenance of maps cannot rely on VGI alone,
even if VGI does indeed represent an important alternative and complementary

source for data, which must be given further attention. Chapter     15by T. Edwin
Chow situates VGI in the ﬁeld of Web demographics. Within this ﬁeld are a whole
host of Web-based systems that acquire, sort, and utilize personal data. At issue
for Chow is how the ﬁeld of Web demographics complicates generalizations about

VGI – for instance, about the degree of voluntarism attributable to donors of geo-
graphical and personal information or the accuracy of such information. In Chap.16,
Mark H. Palmer and Scott Kraushaar employ actor-network theory (ANT) to
describe a storm-tracking network that relies to a great extent on VGI. ANT preesnts
itself as especially useful for their analysis by facilitating consideration of co-

constitutive relations between society and technology. Speciﬁc to this case, ANT
provides adequate ﬂexibility for narration of both the centralized and decentralized
processes on which storm report ing relies. Chapter     17by Michael W. Dobson
examines the gathering and compilation of     VGI for mapping databases that, in
some cases, also rely on traditional map    database compilation techniques. The

author reviews the promise and pitfalls of compilation systems and considers how
the latter – pitfalls – might be overcome. In    Chap.   18, Christopher Goranson,
Sayone Thihalolipavan, and Nicolás di Tada consider the potential utility and pos-
sible pitfalls of recent advances in bringing together VGI and (public) health
research. The updatability and time sensitivity of VGI are cited as central to the

potential contributions. The authors also acknowledge that the use of VGI intro-
duces new challenges – ethical and practical – particularly with regard to privacy.
Chapter   19by Thomas Bartoschek and Carsten Keßler deals with the        heretofore
1  Volunteered Geographic Information, the Exaﬂood, and the Growing Digital Divide 9


largely neglected role of VGI in education and how it does or may trans        form
curricula at a variety of levels, from primary education to graduate studies. The
authors discuss how VGI has been introduced into classrooms and – through analy-
sis of survey data – examine the motivations for and impediments to continued

use of different VGI platforms.
   In the last chapter (Chap. 20), we discuss the prospects for VGI research and its
implications for GIScience and geography in the context of the fourth paradigm –
data-intensive scienti ﬁ c inquiry.



   1.5      Crowdsourcing Geographic Knowledge: From the Death

       of Distance to the Revenge of Geography

Back in 1995, The Economist magazine made (in retrospect) a premature announce-

ment of the death of distance (Cairncros1s995) – the idea that distance (by implitiaon
location and more broadly geography) plays a less important role in the operation of
an increasingly globally connected society in the age of rapid advances and inntivnas
in information and communications technologies. Howevr    e, it took less than 10 years
before The Economist published another cover story on the theme of the revenge of

geography (The Economist 2003). It turned out that, in an increasingly connected
world, the precise role of distance in many societal functions may have changed, but
location, and more broadly geography, has assumed a more crucial role in economic
and business activities as well as in social and cultural affairs. More than ever, wire-
line and wireless technologies have bound the virtual and physical worlds closer

(Gordon and de Souza e Silva 2011 ) .
   To us, the revenge of geography not only suggests the growing importance of
location and geocoding or geotagging in the ocean of big data but also the height-
ened sense of and deeper appreciation for the growing divide and uneven develop-
ment of an increasingly interconnected world (Hecht and Moxley2009; Warf2010 ) .

Situating VGI in the context of big data is only the ﬁrst step to realize VGI’s much
broader potential and impacts down the road. Furthermore, VGI must be placed also
in the context of crowdsourcing geographic knowledge about the world. Gould
 (1999) anticipated the arrival of a spatial century and further argued that “there is a
geographer in most people (p. 314).” Multiple new technological advances during
the past two decades have indeed unleashed the potential of a geographer within

everybody. The phenomenon of VGI that emerged during theﬁrst decade of the
twenty-ﬁrst century is one of the many manifestations of a spatial century. VGI
represents an unprecedented shift in the content, characteristics, and modes gfragoic
information creation, sharing, dissemination, and use. To us, this is the essence of
the revenge of geography in the age of Web 2.0.

   Big data obviously demands big machines (in terms of both speed and storage)
for us to succeed in the number crunching needed to make use of them. But more
importantly, big data also demands big ideas to address the world’s big problems
effectively. With the support of new cyberinfrastructure, new creative partnerships
  10                                                                                  D. Sui et al.


  among government agencies, NGOs, industry and businesses, the academy, and

  citizens can be formed. It is gratifying to read the stories about Water Hackathon
  (waterhackathon.org). The World Bank has sponsored over 2,500 projects like this
  in more than 30,000 locations all over the world, and geospatial technologies have

  played crucial roles in all of these projects. Most recently, the World Bank has part-
  nered with Google to make Google Map Maker’s global mapping platform available

  in over 150 countries and 60 different languages, which has enabled citizen cartog-
  raphers to help those in dire need.     11We all should do no less. In the chapters that

  follow in the book, the reader will experience an interdisciplinary perspective on
  how we can rely on VGI to engage in a new mode of geographic knowledge produc-
  tion through crowdsourcing for a more efﬁcient, more equitable, and sustainable

  world – to us that will be the most gratifying result of the revenge of geography.



    References


  Ball, M. (2011). How do crowdsourcing, the internet of things and big data converge on geospatial

     technology?   http://www.vector1media.com/spatialsustain/how-do-crowdsourcing-the-internet-
     of-things-and-big-data-converge-on-geospatial-technology.html . Accessed January 22, 2012.
    Bennett, J. (2010O).enStreetMap. Birmingham: Packt Publishing Ltd.
  Bryan, J. (2010). Force multipliers: Geography, militarism, and the Bowman expeditions.Political
     Geography, 29 (8), 414–416.

  Cairncross, F. (1995). The death of distance. Economist, 336(7934), 5–6 (30 September).
    CORDIS (2010R  ).iding the wave: How Europe can gain from the rising tide of scientiﬁc dataF.inal
     report of the high level expert group on scieni data.             http://cordis.europa.eu/fp7/
     ict/e-infrastructure/docs/hlg-sdi-report.pdf
  de Laat, P. B. (2010). How can contributors to open-source communities be trusted? On the assump-
     tion, inference, and substitution of trust.Ethics of Information Technology, 12(4), 327–341.

Elkus, A. (2011). Hurricane Irene: GIS, social media, and big data shine.          http://ctovision.
     com/2011/08/hurricane-irene-gis-social-media-and-big-data-shine . Accessed January 11, 2012
  Elwood, S. (2008a). Volunteered geographic information: Key questions, concepts and methods to
     guide emerging research and practice. GeoJournal, 72 (3/4), 133–135.
  Elwood, S. (2008b). Volunteered geographic information: Future research directions motivated by

     critical, participatory, and feminist GIS. GeoJournal, 72 , 173–183.
  Engler, N. J., & Hall, G. B. (2007). The Internet, spatial data globalization, and data use: The case
     of Tibet. The Information Society, 23 , 345–359.
  Feick, R. D., & Roche, S. (2010). Introduction (to special issue on VGI). Geomatica, 64 (1), 5–6.
 Francica, J. (2011). Big data and why you should care.       http://apb.directionsmag.com/entry/

     big-data-and-why-you-should-care/167326    . Accessed January 21, 2012.
 Gantz, J., & Reinsel, D. (2011). Extracting value from chaos.     http://www.emc.com/collateral/
     analyst-reports/idc-extracting-value-from-chaos-ar.pdf Accessed January 21, 2012.
 Genovese, E., & Roche, S. (2010). Potential of VGI as a resource for SDIs in the North/South
     context. Geomatica, 64 (4), 439–450.
 Gilbert, M., & Masucci, M. (2011).    Information and communication technology geographies:

     Strategies for bridging the digital divide . Vancouver: Praxis (e) Press – University of British
     Columbia.


   1 1
    http://www.nytimes.com/2012/01/14/opinion/empowering-citizen-cartographers.html?_r=2
  (accessed February 16, 2012).
  1   Volunteered Geographic Information, the Exaﬂood, and the Growing Digital Divide           11


  Goodchild, M. F. (2007). Citizens as sensors: The world of volunteered geography.   GeoJournal,

      69 (4), 211–221.
  Gordon, E., & de Souza e Silva, A. (2011).    Net locality: Why location matters in a networked
      world. New York: Wiley-Blackwell.
  Gore, A. (1999). The digital earth: Understanding our planet in the 21st century.portal.opengeo-

      spatial.org/ ﬁ les/?artifact_id=6210ccessed February 16, 2012.
     Gould, P. (1999B)e.coming a geographer. Syracuse: Syracuse University Press.
 Graham, M. (2011). Time machines and virtual portals: The spatialities of the digital divide.
      Progress in Development Studies, 11 (3), 211–227.

  Hall, B. G., Chipeniuk, R., Feick, R. D., Leahy, M. G., & Deparday, V. (2010). Community-based
      production of geographic information using open source software and Web 2.0. International
      Journal of Geographical Information Science, 24 (5), 761–781.
   Hayes, C. (2012). Geospatial and big data: The challenge of leveraging constantly evolving Information.

      Presentation during 2012 Defense Geospatial Intelligence (DGI), London, January 24, 2012.
   Hecht, B., & Moxley, E. (2009). Terabytes of Tobler: Evaluating the ﬁrst law in a massive, domain-
      neutral representation of world knowledge. In COSIT’09 Proceedings of the 9th International
      Conference on Spatial Information Theory (pp. 88–105). Berlin: Springer.

  Interagency Working Group on Digital Data (IWGDD) (2009). Harnessing the power of digital
      data for science and society.http://www.nitrd.gov/About/Harnessing_Power_Web.pdf
Kessler, F. (2011). Volunteered geographic information: A bicycling enthusiast perspective.
      Cartography and Geographic Information Science, 38 (3), 258–268.

 Killpack, C. (2011). Big data, bigger opportunity.       http://www.geospatialworld.net/images/
      magazines/gw-april11–18–26%20Cover%20Story.pdf       . Accessed January 31, 2012.
 MacIve, K. (2010). Google chief Eric Schmidt on the data explosion.         http://www.i-cio.com/
      features/august-2010/eric-schmidt-exabytes-of-data . Accessed February 16, 2012.

     MacKinnon, R. (2012  C).nsent of the networked: The worldwide struggle for Internet freedom .
      New York: Basic Books.
   Manyika, J., Chui, M., Brown, B., Bughin, J., Dobbs, R., Roxburgh, C., & Byers, A. H. (2011). Big
      data: The next frontier for innovation, competition, and productivity. http://www.mckinsey.

      com/Insights/MGI/Research/Technology_and_Innovation/Big_data_The_next_frontier_for_
      innovation
  Meek, D. (2011). YouTube and social movements: A phenomenological analysis of participation,
      events, and cyberplace. In Antipode.Epub ahead of print. Accessed January 4, 2012. doi:

      10.1111/j.1467–8330.2011.00942.x
 Merriﬁeld, A. (2011). Crowd politics: Or, ‘Here Comes Everybuddy’.         New Left Review, 71 ,
      103–114.
  Milgram, S. (1967). The small world problem. Psychology Today, 2 , 60–67.

  Miller, H. J. (2010). The data avalanche is here: Shouldn’t we be digging?  Journal of Regional
      Science, 50 , 181–201.
   Newman, G., Zimmerman, D., Crall, A., Laituri, M., Graham, J., & Stapel, L. (2010). User-friendly
      web mapping: Lessons from a citizen science website. International Journal of Geographical

      Information Science, 24 (12), 1851–1869.
   Newsam, S. (2010). Crowdsourcing what is where: Community-contributed photos as volunteered
      geographic information. IEEE Multimedia, 17 (4), 36–45.
  Obe, R., & Hsu, L. (2011). PostGIS in action. Stamford: Manning Publications.

  Ramm, F., & Topf, J. (2010).   OpenStreetMap: Using and enhancing the free map of the world .
      Cambridge: UIT Cambridge Ltd.
   Rana, S., & Joliveau, T. (2009). Neogeography: An extension of mainstream geography for every-
      one made by everyone? Journal of Location Based Services, 3 (2), 75–81.

  Roche, S., Propeck-Zimmermann, E., & Mericskay, B. (2011). GeoWeb and crisis management:
      Issues and perspectives of volunteered geographic information. GeoJournal,Epub ahead of
      print. Accessed January 4, 2012. doi:10.1007/s10708–011–9423–9.
 Ron, L. (2008). Google maps=Google on maps.            http://blip.tv/oreilly-where-20-conference/
      lior-ron-google-maps-google-on-maps-975838
12                                                                                   D. Sui et al.


 Shirkey, C. (2006). Power laws, weblogs, and inequality. In J. Dean, J. W. Anderson, & G. Lovink

    (Eds.), Reformatting politics (pp. 35–42). New York: Routledge.
 Swanson, B. (2007). The coming exaﬂood.Wall Street Journal(January 20).    http://www.discovery.
    org/scripts/viewDB/index.php?command=view&id=3869        . Accessed March 1, 2010.
The Economist (2003). The revenge of geography.     http://www.economist.com/node/1620794

 Travers, J., & Milgram, S. (1969). An experimental study of the small world problem.Sociometry,
    32 , 425–434.
   Warf, B. (2008T). e-space compression: Historical geographies. London: Routledge.
Warf, B. (2010). Uneven geographies of the African Internet: Growth, change, and implications.

    African Geographical Review, 29 (2), 41–66.
Warf, B. (2011). Geographies of global Internet censorship. GeoJournal, 76 (1), 1–23.
Warf, B., & Sui, D. (2010). From GIS to neogeography: Ontological implications and theories of
    truth. Annals of GIScience, 26 (4), 197–209.
                                     Part I
Public Participation and Citizen Science
   Chapter 2

 Understanding the Value of VGI



   Rob Feick       and    Stéphane Roche










 AbstractGrowing investments of time,money and other resourcesin theproduction
of geographic information (GI) in concert with the increasingly widespread use

of GI throughout society are often accompanied by statements that reference the
economic, cultural and social value of GI. Despite considerable effort over the past
decade, our capacity to quantify the value of GI or even understand how value
should be conceptualized remains limited. The recent emergence of volunteered

geographic information (VGI) has introduced several new facets to the challenge of
understanding the value of (V)GI. This chapter examines how VGI use and produc-
tion are challenging our understanding of how GI and VGI alike are valued.
Following a review of the traditional approaches to valuing GI, the chapter explores
the distinctive characteristics of VGI use and production that introduce new dimen-

sions to value. More speciﬁcally, the chapter proposes several metaphors (serendipi-
tous and unexpected discovery, Debord’s ‘Dérives’ metaphor, Lego block theory)
that can be used to conceptualize VGI value and the potential to adapt the ‘ﬁtness-
for-use’ concept to guide user assessments of VGI value in practice.




   2.1      Introduction


There is growing evidence that many decision makers in the public, private and
non-governmental sectors recognize that geographic information (GI) is, or can be,
of considerable value (Crompvoets et al2.010 ) . De ﬁ nitions of value vary cd;ersliy


  R. Feick) (
  School of Planning , University of Waterloo , Waterloo , ON , Canada
e-mail: rdfeick@uwaterloo.ca

  S. Roche
  Département des sciences géomatiques , Université Laval , Québec , QC , Canada
e-mail: Stephane.Roche@scg.ulaval.ca


D. Sui et al. (eds.), Crowdsourcing Geographic Knowledge: Volunteered Geographic
Information (VGI) in Theory and Practice, DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-4587-2_2,
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
16                                                               R. Feick and S. Roche


however, the term value is broadly understood to capture, at least in a nominal
sense, the concepts of importance or worth (Longhorn and Blakemore2008 ) . Public
expenditures on spatial data infrastructures, mapping agencies and spatial data
sets and a proliferation of private investments in GI-centric products and services

(e.g. GM’s OnStar, Oracle Spatial) are some of the most tangible examples of the
economic importance of GI. Similarly, concerns related to the social value of GI
(Roche et al. 2003) and particularly equity imbalances associated with differential
access to GI provided much of the initial impetus for public participation GIS
(PPGIS) research and practice.

   While there may be widespread recognition that GI has signiﬁcant economic and
social value, our understanding of how to quantify or even conceptualize the value
of GI remains limited (Crompvoets et al. 2010; Longhorn and Blakemore 2008 ) .
The rapid emergence of user-generated, or volunteered, geographic information
(VGI) as a complementary model for spatial data use and production has introduced
several new facets to the challenge of understanding the value of (V)GI (Goodchild

2007). Some of these changes, such as advertising-supported GI business models
and cost savings that ﬁrms realize through user-generated and crowdsourced data,
are relatively straightforward to conceptualize and monetize as they can be seen
to some extent as variants of past practices (Rana and Joliveau 2009 ) . In contrast,
the sociopolitical dimensions of VGI value are both more interesting and more

problematic to consider in light of traditional valuing approaches. For example,
questions of who beneﬁts, and to whatxetent, from the evolvingprocesses forcreating
and using VGI become less tractable as one considers that the nature of social tiensa
across the Geoweb is often transient and issue and place speciﬁc (Elwood     2010 ) .
Similarly, conceptualizing the value of the representations, processes and outcomes

associated with VGI is all the more challenging given that the boundaries of what
constitutes ‘geographic information’ are substantially more ﬂuid and opaque in the
Web 2.0 realm than in the preceding era (Haklay et al. 2008 ) .
   This chapter explores these dimensions of VGI value and more generally exa   imes
how the phenomenon of VGI use and production is challenging our understanding

of how GI and VGI alike are valued. A foundation for this discussion is built in the
next two sections which (a) discuss how the concept of value has been deﬁned and
subsequently applied to geographic information and (b) review brieﬂy concepts and
approaches integral to valuing traditional or authoritative GI. Next, the discuornns
to the speciﬁc characteristics ofGI which require thattraditional valuingapproaches
be reconsidered. The chapter concludes by suggesting several metaphors that can be

used to conceptualize VGI value and the potential to adapt the ‘ﬁtness-for-use’ccont
to guide user assessments of VGI value in practice.



   2.2      De ﬁ ning Value and the Value of Geographic Information


Although the term ‘value’ permeates both popular discourse and academic research,
the task of deﬁning exactly what the word means has proven to be somewhat elusive.
Rodriguez 2 (005) noted that a broad distinction can be made between philosophical
2  Understanding the Value of VGI                                                    17


conceptualizations of value and those that are rooted in concepts of economic worth.
From a philosophical perspective, value is used most frequently to refer to indiva  ilsu’
core beliefs and is linked to concepts of morals, ethics and behaviour, and judging

whether individuals’ or societal choices can be deemed to be right or wrong.
This conceptualization is central to discussions relating to the ethical use of infor-
mation technology as illustrated in standards of behaviour for the GI profession
(e.g. GIS Certiﬁcation Institute’s Code of Ethics) and ongoing debates concerning
the social impact of GI technology, particularly but not exclusively in terms of privacy

and surveillance (see, e.g. Perkins and Dodge       2009; Pickles 1995; Elwood and
Leszczynski2011). While this research is clearly of interest to the broader GIScience
community, this chapter focuses on the perspective where value is seen as an indtio  car
of the worth or signiﬁcance of a speciﬁc good or service.
   Economic theory has historically associated value with concepts such as utility,

beneﬁt and willingness to pay and has used itto explore issues as dv ierse asconsumer
behaviour, local patterns of government expenditures and the economic worth of
protecting endangered species (Musgrave        1939; Tiebout 1956; Richardson and
Loomis 2009   ). Despite its central presence in economics theory and continued
efforts to view value through a common monetary lens, economists have long

grappled with the multifaceted nature of the concept. The value of private or near-
private goods (i.e. excludable, rivalrous), for example, can be approximated reason-
ably well as a function of purchase price paid (exchange value) and/or the sum of
production, distribution and implementation costs (Genovese et a2l0  .09a ) . In contrast,
the value of goods and services that display characteristics of common property

or public goods (e.g. national parks, clean air and oceanﬁsh stocks) cannot be
monetized as readily since markets fail when potential users cannot be excluded by
pricing or exclusive ownership mechanisms. Some goods and services (e.g. heacla     tre,
telecommunications systems) are recognized for being of value to both individuals

and to society as a whole, albeit to different degrees. Others may be considered
of worth for cultural or political reasons (e.g. religious sites, historic structures). Even
in the cases where there is widespread agreement on their importance, quanti fying
these dimensions of value is still particularly difﬁcult. Geographic information
typically has characteristics of both private and public goods or services (e.g. catdrasl

parcels, land cover, road networks) which makes it problematic to express through
monetary metrics and more generally contributes to difﬁculty understanding its value.
   Irrespective of whether value is articulated through economic metrics such as
money or qualitative comparisons (e.g. quality of life indices), it is apparent that
value is both relative and dynamic. Through personal experience, we know that

the value of particular goods or services varies with individuals’ preferences, the
use that good is applied to, available alternatives and the situation in which it is
consumed, among other factors. For example, a person may value a tourist map of
an unfamiliar city quite highly during their travels and simply discard that map
when they return home, while another person with ﬁrsthand knowledge of the city

may not see any value in the tourist map.
   The contingent nature of value introduces complexities into assessing the value
of geographic information. First, information can be seen to possess primarily latent
value that is only realized when it is applied to an appropriate problem or cognitive
18                                                                R. Feick and S. Roche


task (Longhorn and Blakemore2008 ) . In this wta   hye, value ofan informationproduct
(e.g. stream network) is catalysed by some uses (e.g. hydrological modelling) and
not others (e.g. transportation planning) and by selected users. Second, information
is an intangible product that often resembles ade facto public good since use by one

person does not preclude others’ use; however, use restrictions owing to license
agreements, copyright and conﬁdentiality concerns often mean that it can approxi-
mate a de jure private good. In these cases, the value of geographic data produced
through traditional, authoritative processes can be quantiﬁed as a function of inputs
(e.g. labour, time, software, distribution costs) and proﬁt. Third, many of the beneﬁts

associated with GI use are intangible or qualitative in nature. Investments in GIS,
spatial data infrastructures (SDIs) and associated technologies, for example, are
justiﬁed not only in terms of cost savings or economic spinoffs but also with ree erce
to important yet difﬁcult to quantify beneﬁts such as improved decision making,
customer service, public safety or social utility value (Roche and Raveleau     2009 ;
Obermeyer 2006 ) .




   2.3      Approaches to De ﬁ ning the Value of Authoritative GI


As mentioned by Genovese et al. (2009a), assessing the value of digital information
products services and infrastructures in general, and GI in particular, is challenging
for several reasons. First, since no consensus exists about how GI itself should be
deﬁned (is it a product, a process, a public good?), deﬁning and assessing the value
of GI are complicated. Moreover, even if the quantitative part of the value, including

monetary costs to create, update, market and distribute a particular data set, can be
calculated with reasonable certainty, the qualitative dimension of GI value is still
difﬁcult to estimate. Longhorn and Blakemore ( 2008) also note that the value of a
given data set will often vary between individuals and/or organizations because of
differences in their needs, resources and objectives. In this way, they refer to the

extrinsic characteristics of GI and consider its value relative to its capacity to meet
users’ needs and expectations. From thisﬁtness-for-use approach, the economic
value of GI can be expressed in terms of its exchange value or the amount that a
purchaser is willing to pay for it. More commonly, GI displays a mixture of public
and private good characteristics. These multistage processes of modifying GI from
their original form to create newly derived products are particularly important when

assessing the value of GI to an economy.
   Nevertheless and primarily because of the needs of ofﬁcial GI producers        (i.e.
government agencies, private data creators/resellers), several research efforts over
the past 15 years have been devoted to the question of GI value and developing
economic evaluation methods in particular (see reviews in Longhorn and Blakemore

2008; Genovese et al. 2009a). Most of this work has centred on developing quan-
titative economicmethods and models to calculate the economic value of GI through
approaches such as nonlinear prices (Krek and Frank 2000 ) , cost-bene ﬁ t analysis
(CBA) (Halsing et al.2004), return on investment (ROI) (Craglia and Nowak2006 )
2   Understanding the Value of VGI                                                19


and avoided costs (Didier 1990). One of the main motivations and expectations
from the authoritative and primarily public sector GI producers’ point of view was
to deﬁne the economic beneﬁts of GI production associated with government

operations. Several national studies on this issue of quantifying the net beneﬁts of
state investment in GI production to regional and national economies have been
completed for countries such as Australia (ACIL Tasman     2008 ) , the United States
(GITA 2007  )and Canada (Natural Resources Canada         2006 ) . Trying to provide
rationale for cost recovery or revenue generation is another motivation for govern-

ments given recent periods of budgetary restrictions. On the private sector side, GI
producers have consistently tried to identify and delimit value with reference to
potential GI markets and the need to maximize prﬁ ots. The recent extension ofspatial
data infrastructures (SDIs) to regional scales (e.g. Quebec, Canada (PGGQ 2004 ) ;
Catalonia, Spain (Garcia Almiral2 l 008)) has generated more interest in understandg

the economic value of SDI investments on regional and local economies.
    Methods developed for products and services other than information, including
value chain and market segmentation methods, have been applied in recent years
to estimate the value of GI for various ﬁelds and uses (Krek 2006; Genovese et al.
2009b, 2010 ) . Longhorn and Blakemor2       e00(8, p. 38) deﬁne the value chain as

‘the set of value-adding activities an organization performs in creating and disturtiibng
goods and services, including direct activities such as production and sales, and
indirect activities such as managing human resources and providingﬁnance’.
Value is created step by step along the chain; thus, pricing in a value chain serves
to determine the way in which the value created for the end user is distributed

among the contributors (Genovese et al. 2010). The sum of all such margins, at
the end of the chain, equals the total value added (Krek and Frank           2000 ) .
While the value chain is considered as one of the most suitable approaches to
assess GI value (Krek and Frank 2000; Longhorn and Blakemore 2008 ; Genovese

et al. 2009b), it is also one of the most complex due to the number of variables that
have to be taken into account to characterize production and dissemination of
GI. Consequently, an operational value chain method dedicated to GI still remains
to be developed.
   Understanding the qualitative value of authoritative GI has proven to be more

complex than attempting to measure value through monetary approaches such as
cost/beneﬁt or return on investment. Usually measures of social beneﬁt have been
expressed in terms of outcomes such as improved service delivery, better informed
decision making and enhanced capacity for disadvantaged groups to capitalize on
publicly available GI and spatial information technology. Craglia and Novak ( 2006 )

identiﬁed three main types of social-political beneﬁts associated with authoritative
GI use:

1. Beneﬁts to citizens through greater access to information and more transparent
   and accountable governance, improved empowerment and participation, ctuosmer/
   citizen goodwill and quality of life
2. Beneﬁts to government that arise from improved collaboration with other stake-
   holders within and outside government, greater political legitimacy, improved
20                                                               R. Feick and S. Roche


   decision making, enhanced service delivery (e.g. health services) and better
   management and planning of land use change, environmental issues and sustain-
   able development
  3.    Bene ﬁ ts to burseatss to increased innovation andknowledge, newbusiness

   opportunities and applications, and job creation
Deﬁning the value of authoritative GI across economic, social and political dimen-

sions remains a real challenge. Even when there is an agreement on the deﬁnition
of value, the concept is inherently complex as it encompasses many variables and
theoretical and practical positions that relate to the intrinsic characteristics of data,
characteristics of the end user (e.g. novice to expert continuum) and variability in
the requirements of differentﬁelds and use contexts (e.g. contrasting demands

for accuracy, precision and currency for cartographic uses vs. scientiﬁc analyses).
Most of the methods already developed usually deﬁne value from a particular user
group’s perspective (e.g. company,individual), althoughsometimes thereareattempts
to extend this to the broader society through methods such as cost/beneﬁt, multiplier
effects, ROI and value chains.




   2.4      What Is Different About Valuing VGI?

There are some signs that the approaches outlined above for understanding the value

of authoritative GI can be applied, at least to some extent, to VGI. For example,
some ﬁrms have effectively outsourced aspects of data maintenance and creation by
encouraging their end users to submit reports of data errors and omissions. Google
Maps’ ‘report a problem’, Garmin’s ‘report a map problem’ and TomTom’s ‘M     Shaapre’
applications are some of the more widely known examples of private authoritative

GI being augmented and enhanced through VGI. Quantifying the economic value of
integrating customers’ VGI into ﬁrm’s operations is difﬁcult since this information
is privately held; however, some approximation could be made with reference to
avoided costs and, potentially, greater customer allegiance associated with GI ser-
vices that are updated on an ongoing basis. The maturation of VGI projects such as
OpenStreetMap has also had recognizable economic spinoffs asﬁrms have built

new business models based on enhancing a royalty-free data source (e.g. CloudMade)
or developing new Geoweb applications and services that rely on ‘free’ data and
often open-source software (e.g. JOSm, Potlatch, CloudMade or even Ushahidi).
   Evidence of the social value of VGI is most apparent within the areas of crisis
mapping, humanitarian aid and disaster relief. Goodchild and Glendon ( 2010 ) and

others (e.g. Roche et al.2011 ) document well c  tontributions thatcitizens’ location-
encoded media (e.g. SMS messages, geotagged photos and movies) can make to
relief efforts. The Ushahidi-Haiti platform represents well the social value of such
an application for crisis management. Operational only 3 days after the 2010 earth-
quake, it received over 3,000 testimonies of relief needs in 2 weeks with more than

half being posted via SMS. Basic mapping needs were accentuated by the earth-
quake as well, given that there had been no recent mapping by the government
2  Understanding the Value of VGI                                                    21


and that the national Haitian map agency was totally destroyed by the earthquake.
Following the earthquake, mapping campaigns grouped under the initiative Drawing
Together were carried out by hundreds of Internet volunteers all around the world.

The work achieved by these ‘tech volunteers’ was subsequently continued by many
other existing initiatives such as OpenStreetMap, which quickly developed an
OSM-based collaborative mapping platform speciﬁcally dedicated to Haiti (Roche
et al. 2011). Clearly, it is not possible in cases such as this to assign quantitative
values to information that can reduce suffering or possibly save lives. Moreover,

given that VGI may be the only current and relevant form of GI in some crisis
situations, even the possibility of estimating value through comparisons to private
or public sector alternatives is removed.
   Personal capacity building and more precisely spatial enablement refer to another
ﬁeld where the social value of VGI ﬁgures prominently. From an individual’s point

of view, ‘spatial enablement’ as deﬁned by Williamson et a2   l.0(10) refers to a pesron’s
ability to use any geospatial information and location technologies as a means to
activate their spatial skills and then improve their spatiality. Lussault (2007 ) de ﬁ nes
spatiality as the way people (or groupsof people) interact withspace and other indi-
viduals (or groups) on, in and through space. Hence, in the current social context,

individual spatiality should not be considered detached from possibilities offered
by information-enabled mobility (info-mobility) and real-time geo-communication
(location-based communication). Therefore, a spatially enabled citizen is character-
ized by their ability to express, formalize, equip (technologically and cognitively)
and of course consciously – or unconsciously – activate and efﬁciently use their

spatial skills. We argue that being involved in VGI activities is actually one of
the more preeminent means for individuals to develop their spatial enablement.
This improvement is another characteristic of the social value of VGI. Improving
spatial enablement, for a group of people, or even an organization or the society

itself, is part of geosocial added value.
   The high proﬁle examples mentioned above illustrate that it is possible to at least
approximate the relative value of certain types of VGI. However, understanding
how or if this value can be measured, what dimensions of value are most pertinent
and to whom the beneﬁts and possible detriments (e.g. privacy encroachments) of

VGI accrue is more problematic. This is due in part to the fact that, more than its
authoritative counterparts, VGI’s value is a function of both the intrinsic character-
istics of the data that citizen volunteers create and the socio-technological processes
through which these data are produced and used.This duality of productand process
is captured succinctly in Goodchild’s (2007) original deﬁnition of VGI which refers

to ‘…the widespread engagement of large numbers of private citizens, often with
little in the way of formal qualiﬁcations, in the creation of geographic information’.
As aﬁrst step toward understanding these issues, we identify next several key
characteristics of VGI that cause the approaches developed to value authoritative GI
to be only partially suitable within a volunteer-based and collaborative production

context. For convenience, these characteristics are presented through two broad and
overlapping dimensions that focus on the value of VGI relative to (a) its intrinsic
characteristics as data and (b) its user and production processes.
22                                                               R. Feick and S. Roche


   2.4.1      VGI Data Characteristics


Spatial data sets created through expert-led processes are often evaluated in light
of their intrinsic characteristics such as resolution, currency, level of positional
accuracy as well as the professional reputation of their private or public sector
authors. Many of these properties can be examined through well-known procedures

(e.g. root-mean-square error), compared to published standards and conﬂated to
produce measures of a spatial data set’s overall quality (Burrough and McDonnell
1998; Haklay2010). The spatial data quality literature has long recognized, through
the concept of ‘ﬁtness for use’, that quality, like value, is not absolute because a
given data set has different degrees of suitability for speciﬁc purposes and users’
demands (Chrisman 1983; Devillers and Jeansoulin 2006). Fitness for use does not

translate directly to exchange value largely because it is not feasible to charge
people different prices based on their willingness to pay. However, in most instances
there is a positive correlation between overall data quality and price when demand
is aggregated (Genovese et al. 2009a; Longhorn and Blakemore 2008 ) .
   Compared to authoritative GI, there are several limitations to assessing the

value of VGI data sets as a function of their properties. Given the absence of
market forces and professional standards within the VGI context, documentation
and measurement of these properties are likely to be more variable for VGI than
comparable GI produced by experts. Individuals who create VGI for personal or
very limited group use, for example, have little incentive to document their data

and in this respect are similar to many experts who have ‘working quality’ data for
internal use. In contrast, mature VGI projects such as OpenStreetMap can be
well documented and allow inspection of edits on a record-by-record basis
(OpenStreetMap 2011 ) .
   The heterogeneous nature of VGI introduces further challenges into the asse mssnt
of its value. As documented throughout this book, VGI ranges from data that are

experiential and largely personal in nature (e.g. geotagged vacation photos) through
passively contributed information concerning personal activity spaces(e.g. creditcard
transactions, cellular phone tracking) to what might be considered quasi-scientiﬁc
data (e.g. locations of animal sightings, amateur weather station readings). In gen-
eral, it is reasonable to assume that the closer a speciﬁc VGI resource resembles

authoritative GIand is focused on quantiﬁable and undisputed events, phenomena or
‘facts’, the more applicable traditional metrics of data quality and worth based on
data set properties are. Other dimensions of VGI heterogeneity introduce uncer-
tainty into value appraisals. For example, since VGI is driven by amateurs’ interests,
it is often more diverse in thematic focus than is typical with authoritative GI

(Goodchild 2008). In some respects, novel forms of VGI such as geographically
referenced text messages require established understandings of the nature of spatial
data, their potential uses and,ultimately, their value to be reconsidered and extended
(Sui 2008). Finally, the internal heterogeneity of VGI data sets that are assembled
through the collaborative efforts of many volunteers complicates value assessments.

In particular,the standard approaches for evaluating dataaccuracy andcompleteness
2  Understanding the Value of VGI                                                  23


referred to earlier were designed to apply to GI that was produced entirely by a
single author or entity . Notwithstanding the self-policing nature of communities
engaged in user-generated content, dataquality can vary substantially between con-

tributors to a given data set.


   2.4.2      Use and Production Processes


From the perspective of value, three of the most apparent ways that VGI use and
production processes differ from their authoritative counterparts are (a) spatial

data use and production have been transformed from niche activities involving
experts to processes that engage large numbers of amateurs with varying interests
and abilities, (b) the distinctions between spatial data users and producers are blurred
as individuals participate in both roles at different times (i.e. ‘produsers’ as deﬁned
by Bruns (2008), and more precisely in the GI ﬁeld by Budhathoki et al. (      2008 )

and Coleman et al. (2009)) and (c) data use and production are loosely organized, if
at all, and are not constrained by market forces or the same regulatory and standards
as authoritative GI.
   In the context of this chapter, tnet effect of theseprocesses is greateruncertainty
and variability concerning how the value of VGI should be conceptualized and

operationalized. On the positive side of the ledger, since VGI production is driven
by personal interests and motivation, it often results in data that otherwise would not
be generated by privateﬁrms or government agencies (Goodchild 2008 ) . In some
instances, these data may only be of value to their author; however, in other cases,

rich data sets comprised of local and/or experiential knowledge are created
(Hall et al. 2010). This type of citizen-led process of spatial data production and use
has clear social value. First, it can foster a culture of bottom-up participation where
citizens can have direct control over how their viewpoints are represented within a
digital mapping environment with less expert oversight and control than is typical

with more structured PPGIS cases (Roche 2011). Second, participation in collab-
orative VGI builds individual and community capacity through impr oved social
networks and technical skill sets. Third, the potential to mobilize hundreds, if not
thousands, of loosely organized contributors over short periods of time and collab-
oratively construct data through distributed means is often far more responsive to

emerging needs than governments or even private ﬁrms could be on their own, as
Goodchild and Glendon ( 2010) demonstrate for crisis management purposes. The
so-called Arab Spring, rooted in Tunisia and rapidly disseminated to most of North
African and Middle East countries in early 2011, as well as the more recent Occupy
Wall Street social movements, has clearly shown how powerful and effective a large

mobilization throughout social networks canbe. User-generatedlocation-based con-
tent has played, and still plays, a key role in these important spatial and social dis-
seminations of ideas and thoughts. While not easy to economically assess, the value
of VGI has been dramatically high in terms of social and political changes and also
in terms of social cohesion.
24                                                                R. Feick and S. Roche


   The organic and volunteer-led processes of VGI use and production clearly do
not have only positive impacts on itseconomic and sociopolitical value.For example,
concerns have been expressed about the exploitative (‘geoslavery’) effects of relying
on ‘free’ labour for spatial data production (Dobson and Fisher    2003 ; Obermeyer

2008). Others have noted the potential for personal privacy and conﬁdentiality to
be violated as few limitations exist regarding what can be posted, shared and/or
collected through passive monitoring ofindividuals’ behaviour(e.g. miningpersonal
activity spaces through their cellular phones) within a largely unregulated Geoweb
environment. This issue is, for instance, clearly underlineby the 22 legalcomplaints

the law student Max Schrems hasﬁled against Facebook during the last 2 years
(Yahoo!2011). Lack of professional ov  ersight and control canalso raisedoubtsabout
the quality of VGI and its usefulness for problem solving especially in comparison
to authoritative GI (Grira et al. 2010). Some of this uncertainty relates to the value
of individuals’ contributions to collaborative VGI resources as volunteers’ technical
skill sets, objectivity and motivations for creating and sharing VGI can vary sub-

stantially (Coleman et al. 2009; Budhathoki et al.     2008; Flanagin and Metzger
2008). What makes this particularly challenging in the VGI context is that this
uncertainty applies not only to entire data sets but also to individual features or
records within a data set that has multiple authors. Finally, the responsiveness of
VGI production processes to changes in volunteers’ interests and emerging events

can be somewhat of a double-edged sword as maintaining a cadre of active contribu-
tors over longer periods of time can be difﬁcult (Haklay2010). This challenge is not
new to most volunteer-centred activities in society. However, the value of VGI as a
reliable source of spatial data is diminished if there is uncertainty concerning the
longevity of volunteers’ efforts.




2.5 From Value Chain to Lego Blocks: VGI as Extensible
       and Reusable Data Components


This chapter aimed to explore the speciﬁc dimensions of VGI value and more ga     elery
to examine how the phenomenon of VGI use and production is taxing our under-
standing of how GI and VGI alike are valued. We have argued that the speciﬁc
characteristics of VGI (heterogeneous, time sensitive, responsiveness, geosocial
based, etc.) require traditional valuing approaches to be reconsidered. Rather than

exploring in detail how traditional approaches to GI valuing can be adapted to
the VGI context, in this section we aim to initiate a discussion within the ﬁeld by
proposing that one of the more important dimensions of VGI value is its potential to
foster innovation and learning. In this case, innovation and learning are driven
by users’ idiosyncratic and diverse needs, backgrounds and objectives and result

from both direct content generation and collaborative efforts where others’ data
are e xtended or repurposed. Previous sections of this chapter highlighted that
there is value in VGI outputs (data sets and content) and value in their underlying
socio-technological processes (learning, networking, etc.). Indeed VGI should
contribute to geo-literacy by providing extended opportunities to move learning
2  Understanding the Value of VGI                                                  25


outside the formal educational institution. Geo-enabledvolunteers couldthen ‘record
observations, combine them with observations of others, and analyze them for
geospatial patterns’ (Edelson 2011 ) .

   The value chain concept provides a good metaphor for conceptualizing the
industrial nature of authoritative GI production and the distinctions between GI
use and production processes. While aspects of the value chain can apply to more
structured VGI production (e.g. OSM, Christmas Bird Count), it is clear that it is
not as appropriate for many other types of actively contributed VGI where users

have more latitude to customize their efforts to suit their speciﬁc skills and needs.
Instead, we suggest that other metaphors that recognize explicitly the organic and
sometimes contradictory nature of innovation are more applicable to the VGI milieu.
Raymond’s (  1999) metaphor of the cathedral and the bazaar, for example, is used
widely to contrast proprietary and open-source software. Proprietary software is

developed in a highly structured and for-proﬁt environment where teams of experts
are responsible for assessing needs and developing and marketing monolithic
software packages. Due to the complexity of proprietary software, lack of access
to source code and marketing realities, fundamental change to proprietary software
is almost exclusively controlled by theﬁrm’s experts. In contrast, open-source

software is created in an open and often chaotic manner by individuals and a
changing coalition of users. Innovation in this case is not controlled by experts but
instead is generated through multiple ongoing threads of independent and shared
community development.
   The cathedral and the bazaar metaphor does apply well to some aspects of VGI

use and production. However, Debord’s( 1958)‘Dérives’ metaphor is richer and
more appropriate in the ways that it captures the continual interplay between seren-
dipitous innovation and social learning in VGI production and use. Debord describes
the ‘Dérives’ or drift as a way of wandering in an urban environment without speciﬁc

aims other than to discover and become immersed in a narrative network of experi-
ences and lives. Just as a psychogeographer explores urban space, a VGI produser
often explores, uses and produces new VGI without necessarily having a predeﬁned
plan, timetable or schedule. Navigation inGI processes allo ws produsersto encounter
unexpected data sources, discover anticipated phenomenon and then increase the

potential value of VGI as processes and as datasets. In this way,at leastsome aspects
of VGI value are indeed clearly linked to the concept of serendipity. Serendipity
is an evolving concept that is extensively used in the Web 2.0 literature to refer to
unexpected discoveries that are maderandomly and through intelligencein a process
that initially targets a different object than those that are discovered.

   We do not propose that the serendipitous dimension of VGI value is based solely
on unanticipated discoveries that result from Dérives-like explorations of existing
VGI. Serendipity, for example, is constrained by the richness of the environment (i.e.
what is available to discover) and a produser’s inductive capacity (Bourcier and Van
Andel  2008). More importantly, while the Dérives concept can explain how innova-

tion may be fostered in individuals, it does not adequately account for the synergistic
effects that collaborative use and repurposing of VGI can have on innovation. At the
risk of exceeding the limit of metaphors for a single chapter, it is possible to also
view innovation in the VGI context in much the same way as children create their
26                                                               R. Feick and S. Roche


own toys from a container of Lego building blocks. One child may select compo-
nents (blocks, windows, etc.) to build a house, while another may create a car. A third
child may be inspired by the efforts of the others and help the ﬁrst child to ﬁnish the
house or, after seizing possession, repurpose and modify a playmate’s ‘output’

according to his or her own preferences and abilities. In this light, different VGI data
sets represent data ‘blocks’ that can be extended or reused within collaborative Web
2.0 environments, through joint data construction and mashup-based compilations.
   To varying degrees, these metaphors can help us to conceptualize the linkages
between innovation in VGI processes and the value associated with individual and

social learning processes. However,translating what may bean interesting metaphor
into an operational approach for establishing VGI value remains a substantive
challenge. One approach that appears promising is to harness the collaborative
capacity of the Web 2.0 model to allow users to develop community-based evatliuoans
of VGI value. For example,       Grira e2010 ) adapted the ﬁ tness-for-use concept to
explore how uncertainty regarding the quality of a VGI data set can be addressed in

terms of users’ assessments of its suitability for various tasks. We suggest that a
parallel adaptation of ﬁtness for use could be made to provide mass appraisals of the
value that users ascribe to speciﬁc VGI data sets and their associated processes.
These user-based assessments of VGI could play the same role as users’ evaluations
of restaurants and vacation destinations do on sites such as Yelp! and TripAdvisor.

In this case, even simple user notes (e.g. ‘This data set of streams is complete in my
county, but the adjacent watershed is poorly covered …’) or ratings could provide the
basis for community learning, innovation and communication and could facilitate
identiﬁcation of what types of uses and users a data set is valued for. More impor-
tantly, this form of mass value assessments may provide interesting insights into

the ways that individuals and groups can use VGI to reshape and redeﬁne how
places are represented and understood (Graham and Zook 2011 ) .



   2.6      Summary and Conclusion


This chapter sought to investigate how the growing VGI phenomena and its associ-
ated use and production patterns in business, government and the broader public
are altering how we understand the value of geographic information. Following a
discussion of how the concept of value has been conceptualized in general and

the challenges inherent to valuing information, several of the traditional methods
for valuing GI were reviewed. The contingent natureof value wasseen to be particu-
larly important in the case of geographic information, given that users, applications
and localized needs can vary substantially. This general argument for a context-
sensitive value of GI was seen to be more appropriate in the context of VGI in
light of its unique characteristics. As a data source, the lack of expert oversight,

the absence of professional standards and the inherent heterogeneity of VGI across
thematic, media and spatial dimensions were identiﬁed as key contributors to the
complexity of valuing VGI data. Further complexity in valuing VGI was seen to
2   Understanding the Value of VGI                                                       27


be rooted in the socio-technological processes from whicV      hGI is createdby individu-
als and groups who may not otherwise interact or converse. As one way to manage
this complexity, the appropriateness of several metaphors (e.g. serendipity, Dérives,

Lego block) was explored.
   We would like to see future research engage with and extend this Lego block

concept toward a more formal conceptualization, and we would like to end this chap-
ter by offering a few directions that might be taken. Since this theory is mainly based
on the idea that every VGI data set should be considered as an extensible and reus-

able data component (i.e. a basic Lego block), building a stronger conceptual frame-
work should be based on an ontology for VGI and an evaluative framework. To be
efﬁciently built, this ontology needs to be fed with observations from various ﬁeld

works, from different VGI ‘produse’ contexts and from VGI built for different pur-
poses. As Grira et al. (2010) demonstrated in the context of spatial data uncertainty,
there is good potential to develop an operational evaluation framework for VGI valu-

ing that draws upon user communities’ assessments. Given the heterogeneity of the
VGI phenomenon, we suggest that this framework be tested ﬁrst in some of the more
established VGI contexts (e.g. OpenStreetMap, Wikimapia). Moreover, and follow-

ing the earlier discussion of serendipity and Dérives, we suggest that grounded theory
approaches may be the most appropriate means of identifying the main ‘laws’ of this
Lego block ‘theory’ and evaluating its merits for VGI valuing.





     References

  ACIL Tasman (2008T)h .e value of spatial information: The impact of modern spatial information

    technologies on the Australian economy. Report prepared for the CRC for Spatial Information
    and ANZLIC, the Spatial Information Council, Australia.         http://www.anzlic.org.au/
    Publications/Industy/Downloads_GetFile.aspx?id=251 . Accessed January 2, 2012.
Bourcier, D., & Van Andel, P. (Eds.). (2008). La Sérendipité: Le hasard heureux. Paris: Hermann.
  Bruns, A. (2008B)l.ogs, Wikipedia, second life, and beyond. From production to produsage . New
    York: Peter Lang.
 Budhathoki, N. R., Bruce, B., & Nedovic-Budic, Z. (2008). Reconceptualizing the role of the user
    of spatial data infrastructure. GeoJournal, 72 , 149–160.

 Burrough, P. A., & McDonnell, R. A. (1998)P.rinciples of geographic information systems(2nded.).
    New York: Oxford University Press.
 Chrisman, N.R. (1983). The role of quality informinthe long term functioningof a Geographical
    Information System. Proceedings of the International Symposium on Automated Cartography
    (Auto Carto 6), Ottawa, Canada, pp. 303–321.
Coleman, D. J., Georgiadou, Y., & Labonté, J. (2009). Volunteered geographic information: The
    nature and motivation of produsers. International Journal of Spatial Data Infrastructure
    Research, 4 , 332–358.

 Craglia, M., & Nowak, J. (2006).Report of international workshop on spatial data infrastructures:
    Cost-beneﬁt/return on investment: Assessing the impacts of spatial data infrastructures,
    European Commission, Directorate General Joint Research Centre (Technical report). Ispra:
    Institute for Environment and Sustainability.
 Crompvoets, J., de Man, E., & Macharis, C. (2010). Value of spatial data: Networked performance
    beyond economic rhetoric. International Journal of Spatial Data Infrastructures Research, 5 ,
    96–119.
  28                                                                         R. Feick and S. Roche


 Debord, G. E. (1958). Théorie de la dérive, Internationnale situationniste, n.2, décembre. http://

     debordiana.chez.com/francais/is2.htm#theorie  . Accessed January 2, 2012.
  Devillers, R., & Jeansoulin, R. (Eds.). (2006).Fundamentals of spatial data quality. London: ISTE.
    Didier, M. (199U 0)t.ilité et valeur de l’information géographique. Paris: Presses Universitaires de
     France.

  Dobson, J. E., & Fisher, P. F. (2003 Spring). Geoslavery.IEEE Technology and Society Magazine ,
     47–52.
Edelson, D. C. (2011). “GeoLearning”: Tricorders – The next tool for geographic learning?
     ArcNews, Winter 2010/2011.    http://www.esri.com/news/arcnews/winter1011articles/tricorders.

     html . Accessed January 2, 2012.
    Elwood, S. (2010). Geograpih  nifcormation science: Emerging researchon the societalimplications
     of the geospatial web. Progress in Human Geography, 34 (3), 349–357.
  Elwood, S., & Leszczynski, A. (2011). Privacy reconsidered: New representations, data practices,

     and the geoweb. Geoforum, 42 (1), 6–15.
 Flanagin, A. J., & Metzger, M. J. (2008). The credibility of volunteered geographic information.
     GeoJournal, 72 , 137–148.
  Garcia Almirall, P., Bergadà, M. M., & Queraltó Ros, P. (2008). The socio- economic impact of

     the spatial data infrastructure of Catalonia, European Commission, EUR 23300 EN. Accessed
     January 2, 2012.
  Genovese, E., Cotteret, G., Roche, SC.,aron, C., & Feick, R. (2009a. valuating thesocio-economic
     impact of geographic information: A classiﬁcation of the literature.  International Journal of

     Spatial Data Infrastructure Research, 4 , 218–238.
  Genovese, E., Roche, S., & Caron, C. (2009b). The value chain approach to evaluate the economic
     impact of geographic information: Towards a new visual tool. In B. van Loenen, J. W. J.
     Besemer, & J. A. Zevenberger (Eds.),SDI convergence: Research, emerging trends, and critical

     assessmen(tpp. 175–187).           http://www.gsdi.org/gsdiconf/gsdi11/SDICnvrgncBook.pdf.
     Accessed January 2, 2012.
  Genovese, E., Roche, S., Caron, C., & Feick, R. (2010). The ecoGeo cookbook for the assessment
     of geographic information value.International Journal of Spatial Data Infrastructure Research,

     5 , 120–144.
 GITA (2007). Building a business case for shared geospatial data and services: A practitioners
     guide to ﬁnancial and strategic analysis for a multi-participant program.http://www.fgdc.gov/
     policyandplanning/50states/roiworkbook.pdf   . Accessed January 2, 2012.

  Goodchild, M. F. (2007). Citizens as voluntary sensors: Spatial data infrastructure in the world of
     Web 2.0. International Journal of Spatial Data Infrastructures Research, 2 , 24–32.
  Goodchild, M. F. (2008). Commentary: Whither VGI? GeoJournal, 72 , 239–244.
 Goodchild, M. F., & Glennon, J. A. (2010). Crowdsourcing geographic information for disaster

     response: A research frontier. International Journal of Digital Earth, 3 (3), 231–241.
Graham, M., & Zook, M. (2011). Visualizing global cyberscapes: Mapping user-generated
     placemarks. Journal of Urban Technology, 18 (1), 115–132.
  Grira, J., Bédard, Y., & Roche, S. (2010). Spatial data uncertainty in the VGI world: Going from

     consumer to producer. Geomatica, 64 (1), 61–71.
 Haklay, M. (2010). How good is volunteered geographic information? A comparative study of
     OpenStreetMap and ordnance survey datasets. Environment and Planning B, 37 , 682–703.
Haklay, M., Singleton, A., & Parker, C. (2008). Web mapping 2.0: The neogeography of the

     GeoWeb. Geography Compass, 2 (6), 2011–2039.
  Hall, B., Chipeniuk, R., Feick, R., Leahy, ., & Deparday, V.(2010). Community-basedproduction
     of geographic information using open source software and Web 2.0. International Journal of
     Geographic Information Science, 24 (5), 761–781.

  Halsing, D., Theissen, K., & Bernknopf, R. (2004). A cost-beneﬁt analysis of the National Map.
     Circular 1271, U.S. Department of the Interior, U.S. Geological Survey, Reston, Virginia.
      http://pubs.usgs.gov/circ/2004/1271. Accessed January 2, 2012.
 Krek, A. (2006). Geographic information as an economic good. In M. Campagna (Ed.),         GIS for
     sustainable development. Boca Raton: Taylor and Francis.
   2   Understanding the Value of VGI                                                             29


    Krek, A., & Frank, A. U. (2000). The production of geographic information – The value treeG. eo-

       Informations-Systeme – Journal for Spatial Information and Decision Making 13 (3), 10–12.
       ftp://ftp.geoinfo.tuwien.ac.at/krek/3226_value-tree.pdf. Accessed January 2, 2012.
   Longhorn, R., & Blakemore, M. (2008). Geographic information: Value, pricing, production and
       consumption. Boca Raton: CRC Press.

      Lussault, M. (2007L)’.homme spatial: la construction sociale de l’espace humain. Paris: Seuil.
   Musgrave, R. A. (1939). The voluntary exchange theory of public economy. Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, 53 (2), 213–237.
  Natural Resources Canada (2006).      Résultats du recensement 2004 de l’industrie géomatique

       (Technical report). Sherbrooke: Natural Resources Canada.
   Obermeyer, N. (2006). Measuring the beneﬁts and costs of GIS. In P. Longely, M. Goodchild, D.
       Maguire, & D. Rhind (Eds.),     Geographical information systems: Principles, techniques,
       management and applications (2nd ed., pp. 601–610). Hoboken: Wiley.

   Obermeyer, N. (2008). Thoughts on “Volunteered (Geo)Slavery”.  http://www.ncgia.ucsb.edu/proecjts/
       vgi/docs/position/Obermeyer_Paper.pdf  . Accessed January 2, 2012.
OpenStreetMap (2011). OpenStreetMap Changesets.               http://www.openstreetmap.org/browse/
       changesets . Accessed January 2, 2012.

   Perkins, C., & Dodge, M. (2009). Satellite imagery and the spectacle of secret spaces. Geoforum,
       40 , 546–560.
      Pickles, J. (1995G).round truth: The social implications of geographic information systems    .
       New York: The Guilford Press.

   Plan géomatique du gouvernement du Québec (PGGQ). (2004). Pro ﬁ l ﬁ nancier de la géomatique
       des ministères et des organismes (Technical report). Ministère des Ressources naturelles et de
       la Faunes, Québec, 23.
    Rana, S., & Joliveau, T. (2009. eoGeography: An extension of mainstreamgeography foreveryone

       made by everyone? Journal of Location Based Services, 3 (2), 75–81.
      Raymond, E. S. (199T  9).e cathedral and the bazaar: Musings on Linux and open source by an
       accidental revolutionary. Cambridge, MA: O’Reilly.
    Richardson, L., & Loomis, J. (2009). The total economic value of threatened, endangered and rare

       species: An updated meta-analysis. Ecological Economics, 68 , 1535–1548.
    Roche, S. (2011). De la cartographie participative aux WikiSIG. In O. Walser, L. Thévoz, F. Joerin,
       M. Schuler, S. Joost, B. Debarbieux, & H. Dao (Eds.), Les SIG au service du développement
       territorial (pp. 117–129). Lausanne: Presses polytechniques et universitaires romandes.

    Roche, S., & Raveleau, B. (2009). Social use and adoption models of GIS. In S. Roche & C. Caron
       (Eds.), Organizational facets of GIS (pp. 115–144). London: ISTE Ltd/John Wiley.
   Roche, S., Sureau, K., & Caron, C. (2003). How to improve the social-utility value of geographic
       information technologies for the French local governments? A Delphi study. Environment and

       Planning B: Planning and Design, 30 (3), 429–447.
  Roche, S., Propeck-Zimmerman, E., & Mericskay, B. (2011). GeoWeb and risk management:
       Issues and perspectives of volunteered geographic information.     GeoJournal . doi: 10.1007/
       s10708-011-9423-9   .

   Rodriguez, P. O. (2005).   Cadre théorique pour l’évaluation des infrastructures d’information
       geospatial. PhD thesis, Département des Sciences Géomatiques, Faculté de Foresterie et de
       Géomatique, Laval University, Québec.
   Sui, D. (2008). The wikiﬁcation of GIS and its consequences: Or Angelina Jolie’s new tattoo and

       the future of GIS. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 32 , 1–5.
   Tiebout, C. M. (1956). A pure theory of local expenditures. Journal of Political Economy, 64 (5),
       416–424.
   Williamson, I., Rajabifard, A., & Holland, P. (2010). Spatially enabled society.Proceedings of the

       FIG Congress 2010, “Facing the Challenges – Building the Capacity”, Sydney. http://www. ﬁ g.
       net/pub/ ﬁ g2010/papers/inv03%5Cinv03_williamson_rajabifard_et_al_4134.pdf .           Accessed
       January 2, 2012.
  Yahoo! (2011). Austrian student takes on Facebook.         http://news.yahoo.com/austrian-student-
       takes-facebook-074701796.html    . Accessed December 7, 2011.
   Chapter 3

To Volunteer or to Contribute Locational

Information? Towards Truth in Labeling
for Crowdsourced Geographic Information



   Francis Harvey






 AbstractGeographers, planners, and others increasingly refer to crowdsourced data

in geography as volunteered geographic information (VGI). But is volunteered the
right adjective to use for all types of crowdsourced geographic information? This chap-
ter examines this question by making the following distinction along an ethical line for
crowdsourced data collection: data collected following an “opt-in” agreement is volun-
teered; data collected under an “opt-out” provision is contributed (CGI). Opt-in

agreements provide some clarity and control in the collection and intended reuse of
collected data. Opt-out agreements are, in comparison, very open-ended and begin with
few, if any, possibilities to control data collection. The chapter suggests that distin-
guishingcontributedcrowdsourced data fromvolunteeredcrowdsourced data is impor-
tant to start to understand the nature of sources of crowdsourced data of any provenance

and to help begin to identify possible biases. In the concluding discussion, this chapter
argues that the simple distinction between CGI and VGI is valuable for assessments of
data’s ﬁtness for use. Following the truth-in-labeling principle known for food prod-
ucts, differentiating between CGI and VGI is also helpful to identify cases where lax
approaches or even malfeasance leads to inaccurate or biased crowdsourced data.



      3.1      Introduction


In many discussions, crowdsourced geographic information is unambiguously referred
to as volunteered geographic information (VGI; Goodchild2007 ) . This chapter con-
siders what the term volunteeredindicates and how distinguishing volunteered from
contributed along ethical lines signals important differences in the processes of acqui-

sition and the uses of crowdsourced data. The issue has many dimensions. Most people


  F.  H ar v)ey(
  Department of Geography, University of Minnesota ,
 Minneapolis , MN , USA
e-mail: fharvey@umn.edu ; francis.harvey@gmail.com

D. Sui et al. (eds.), Crowdsourcing Geographic Knowledge: Volunteered Geographic
Information (VGI) in Theory and Practice, DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-4587-2_3,
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
32                                                                             F. Harvey


      Table 3.1Simpliﬁed indicators of differences between clarity and control of crowdsourced
     data collection following volunteered (opt-in) and contributed (opt-out) approaches
                   Volunteered (opt-in)                       Contributed (opt-out)

                   Collection       Reuse                      Collection       Reuse
     Clarity        +                ?            Clarity        ?                ?
     Control        +                ?            Control        −                −

      Explanations:+/− indicates possibility or absence, ? indicates ambiguous possibilities


              Table 3.2Summary of key distinctions between volunteered geographic
             information and contributed geographic information

             Opt-in (volunteered)                  Opt-out (contributed)
             Clarity and speci ﬁ cs                 Vagueness and generalities

             Control over data collection        Uncontrolled data collection
             Limited control over data reuse     No control over data reuse



would agree that data is volunteered when people freely choose to collect data. When
collecting data is part of automated, open-ended, or uncontrollable processes, volun-

teered seems an inappropriate term. When data collection is part of a selective activity
or the looseness of the term crowdsourcing is used to mask inaccurate data collection,
biases, or even outright malfeasance, differentiating modes of collection and partici-

pation can be of great value in assessing data quality. This chapter sets out to show that
a simple distinction between volunteered geographic information (VGI) and contrib-
uted geographic information (CGI), following the difference between the clarity and

control afforded by, respectively, opt-in and opt-out provisions, provides valuable
guidance for assessing crowdsourced data. Both OpenStreetMap (OSM) data and
Geocaching offer examples ofopt-involunteered geographic information. Examples

of opt-outcrowdsourced, or contributed, data include cell phone tracking and RFID-
equipped transport cards. This chapter concludes with the suggestion that people
working with crowdsourced data distinguish VGI from CGI to help provide informa-

tion about the data’s provenance, or origins. The distinction between VGI and CGI
helps to clarify the underlying approach to data collection, use, and reuse potential and
helps to address users’ questions about the origin and quality of crowdsourced geo-

graphic information. The focus is on the importance of informing other creators and
users about key characteristics of crowdsourced geographic information to help ensure
clarity and make better assessments of data quality.




   3.2      Volunteering or Contributing: An Important

       Distinction for Crowdsourced Data


Crowdsourced geographic information are now ubiquitous parts of the information
society (Dobson and Fisher 2003; Goodchild 2007). Examples include the detail

and amount of data collected by most smart phone users without their knowledge
3  To Volunteer or to Contribute Locational Information? Towards Truth in…         33


and without any ability to control the collection. In 2010, a German Green party
member, Malte Spitz, ﬁled a suit in court and received detailed records of his mobile
phone use for a 7-month period from his serviceprovider. The detailin thelocational

data astonished him. The 35,831 individualrecords of information transferred from
his smart phone for this period, either together or in pieces, can be used to create a
proﬁle of his activities that shows when and where he was during this period: what
streets he walked down, when he took a train or a plane, where he worked, where he
likes to go for a beer, and even where and when he slept (Biermann   2011 ) . Detailed

data is being constantly collected for smart phone users, unless they turn off their
phone or disable location services.
   Many examples have recently proliferated of how crowdsourced locational data
is collected, often without our knowledge and frequently without information about
reuses (Liptak 2011; National Research Council        2007; Acohido 2011 ) . Some

people have reported that the locations of their cell phone usage were unknowingly
made available. Apple, Google, and Microsoft all faced embarrassing situations
within the past 2 years (2010–2011) when software engineers discovered the wealth
of location data being recorded and transferred to their mobile devices’ applications
and service providers, often without the user’s knowledge. Indeed, worse yet, even

choosing to disable location services did not stop sending location data, making
turning off the phone the only way to protect location information. The technical
and privacy issues are beyond the scope of this paper, but the hubbub that came
with these recent cases of location information provided by users points to the
importance and social perceptions of location privacy. It also points to complicated

relationships between data collection and reuses (reuses, rather than simply uses to
stress the many multiple uses of crowdsourced geographic information). While
location privacy and surveillance issues are part of larger questions about mobile
computing use and abuse, crowdsourced geographic information already can play

an important role in the ability of companies and government agencies to know and
predict people’s activities.
   The distinction between crowdsourced geographic information that is volun-
teered and contributed is a key distinction proposed in this chapter. Drawing on
that distinction, the concept of truth in labeling, following pragmatic ethics, helps

explain the provenance of crowdsourced geographic information, assess its ﬁtness
for use, and determine if lax standards and even malfeasance diminish the data’s
accuracy (see also the chapter from J. Dobson (Chap.         17) in this book). The
example of Mr. Spitz’s mobile phone data can provide an initial illustration of the
distinction before a longer review of the underlying concepts in the following sec-

tion. Assuming that he had signed a contract giving his provider the right to collect
the data, as most people using smart phones regularly do, did he voluntarily agree
to the collection of his locational data? What did the provider have to do to access
the data for technical, marketing, or other purposes? Could other companies pur-
chase the raw, aggregated, or anonymized data of Mr. Spitz? Making the distinc-

tion between volunteered and contributed can help in assessing not only this data
but any data that is labeled crowdsourced data. Crowdsourced data collected with
user control is volunteered, whereas crowdsourced data collected with no or limited
user control is contributed.
34                                                                           F. Harvey


   That he had to go to court to access his own data is perhaps a surprising twist to
Mr. Spitz’s story, but in this caseperhaps personal access waslimited by thecontract.
In any case, the necessity of that step ifsurther evidence that thisdata wascontributed.

Stipulations in contracts that limit access locational data recorded aboutindividuals
are not unusual. Often we click and accept many pages of contract, which include
information about the collection of location data and its reuse, on our way to exciting
uses of technology applications and hardware. In many cases, and an increasingly
due to concerns about privacy and the use of mobile devices, the choices to provide

location data are clearer cut.
   The distinction between geographic information that has been volunteered and
contributed offers a valuable touchstone for considering crowdsourced data and
later use. A straightforward distinction can be made between data we have chosen
to collect, such as a geotagged photo on a shared website or social networking

service, and data that is collected automaticall, for example,stationary air pollution
monitors or other sensor webs. Geographic informatioc   nollection and reuse ivolving
devices used by people are very complex when considered in detail, but the funda-
mental distinction between volunteered and contributed data offers a pragmatic way
to engage key choices. Pictures we choose to upload to a social networking site

that allows us control over access seem a clear-cut case of volunteered information.
If the same images are used by the same site to advertise this functionality without
knowledge or approval of the person making the pictures, the example involves the
contribution of information. More complex examples arise when access and reuse
are controlled by the person who made the pictures, but the company operating the

site uses geographic information about the location of the pictures to proﬁle users
and sell aggregated data to mobile advertisers. The fundamental difference in terms
of collection is between overtly choosing a course of action to collect geographic
information on the one hand and on the other committing actions in which the

collection of geographic information occurs without control and is possibly designed
to be beyond the user’s direct ability to inﬂuence. Distinctions also need to be drawn
between the ways in which people participate in controlling access and use of data
and derivatives. These distinction can be measuredﬁrst in the possibility to gain
clarity about the purposes for collecting and reusing the data and second in abilities

to control collection and reuse.
  Volunteered geographic information, following these differences, is crowd-
sourced information with clarity about purposes and abilities to control collection
and reuse. Contributed geographic information, or CGI, refers to geographic informa-
tion that has been collected without the immediate knowledge and explicit decision

of a person using mobile technology that records location. Volunteered geographic
information, or VGI, refers to geographic information collected with the knowledge
and explicit decision of a person. Some examples include geographic information
collected in the course of using acell phone (CGI), geographicinformation collected
in the operation of a car navigation system (also CGI), geographic information col-

lected through Geocaching (VGI), and geographic information created during an
OpenStreetMap (OSM) data party (also VGI).
3   To Volunteer or to Contribute Locational Information? Towards Truth in…         35


   The distinction between volunteered and contributed geographic information
opens up possibilities for considering choices and other issues including the prove-
nance of crowd-based geographic information, the better assessment of reuse pottie al,
considerations of location privacy, and liability concerns




   3.3      Ethical and Legal Issues


This section describes how the difference between volunteered and contributed
reﬂects ethical distinctions that also ﬁnd their expression in laws and principles of
the law. Mr. Spitz’s story and other examples point to important ethical choices we
make when assessing the clarity of our contributions to crowdsourced data and our
potential to control its collection and reuse. Related to privacy issues, the conse-
quences for developing applications and implementing applications can be of broad

use and substantial signiﬁcance. While many ethical approaches are brought to bear
on privacy issues, pragmatic ethics offers a very helpful framework to engage the
practical consequences of our actions (Kwame2008; Critchley2007; Harvey2012 ) .
A principle of pragmatic ethics in terms of crowdsourced data is that as creators we
bear responsibilities for what we make possible and as users we have the responsi-

bility to understand what we do. This principle holds relevance for considering the
origin (provenance) of crowdsourced data. Finding satisfactory clarity and accepting
possibilities of control inform our decisions to provide crowdsourced data and our
agreement with the collection and reuse of our contributed data. As there are
no universal values that hold for all people at all times, ethical issues and peoples’

decisions reﬂect a vast range of choices. Laws and legal principles in theory reﬂect
this heterogeneity and strive to delineate a framework that regulates through a mini-
mum of restriction and a maximum of clariﬁcation to support people making
adequate decisions.
   To make this distinction between volunteered and contributed geographic infor-

mation based on clarity and control, some additional considerations of ethical and
legal issues offer important context. Starting with online discussions following
revelations about storage of personal locational data storage on Apple’s iPhone
mobile devices, the so-called Locationgate offersinteresting perspectiveson different
ethical stances towards privacy and the legal context of liability (Pogue2011 ) . Some
people participating in these discussions stated they had no problem with constant

and uncontrolled collection of location data, while others commented that this was
frighteningly close to situations where governments have secretly collected infor-
mation about citizens. Some commentators suggested we simply move on into this
new era and leave privacyas an outdated concept behind,while others were adamant
that the underlying protection of human rights to privacy be assured. A similar range

of views on the ethical, legal, privacy, and liability issues connected to crowdsourced
geographic information would be found among those people with economic stakes
in geographic information or a strong professionalor personal interest.The attitudes
of the public at large may range from fearor concern to acceptance andeven support,
36                                                                               F. Harvey


as revealed by larger studies of public perceptions of information technologies

(Pew Research Center 2010). In contrast, many practitioners are far more likely to
ascertain challenges, even dilemmas, in contradictory positions held between various
professional groups, academics, and social groups (Blakemore and Longhorn2004 ) .
Indeed, legal studies point to the need for a fundamental reworking of outdated laws

to reﬂect the possibilities of the new technologies (Samuelson, n.d. ) . In the current
void, liability frequently surfaces as the concept for concern among data providers
and what contracts seek to limit (Onsrud 1995, 1997 ) .
   In the changing, complex, and even contradictory legal landscape related to

mobile technologies, pragmatic ethical concepts may provide a good guide for
deliberation around choices and issues related to protection of individual privacy as
well as for clarifying the origins of crowdsourced geographic information. As va      alle
as principles are, the complexity of situationspoints to the needto translateconcepts

into actions or the creation of policies to guide actions. To explain clarity- and
control-related choices connected to cro  wdsourced geographic informationcollection
and use, established distinctions between opt-out and opt-in principles in agreeing to
use devices and applications offer a very sound approach to translating ethicalc     conts

into actions and uses of geographic information (Elwood and Leszczynski 2011 ) .
   Central differences between opt-in and opt-out provisions lie ﬁrst in the choice a
potential user has to control the service (opt-in) or to accept the service and all its
terms and conditions unconditionally (opt-out). Opt-in provisions afford more

ﬂexibility and control, for example, the possibility of using some location service
functions while disabling others. Under opt-out provisions, a potential user faces a
starker choice between using a service or a device and rejecting the service or device

entirely.
   Most software and applications that make use of personal location information
have opt-out provisions, for example, the mid-2011 Apple privacy policy describes
how to opt out of aspects of their interest-based provision of advertisements to end
      1                                                         2
users. The open-ended iPhone software license agreement explains that the use of
location-based services indicates agreement and consent to Apple and its partners to
collect, maintain, process, and use the customer’s location data, subject to with-
drawal at any time. However, third-party applications and services use different

terms and privacy policies.
   For the collection of contributed geographic information, many agreements
require the creator or user of the CGI to agree before use to accept all terms or
otherwise not use the device or application. For example, users of Google’s Map

Maker application can ﬁnd this explanation of terma     snd privacy aspart of theopt-out
policy for any submissions they make:
   By submitting User Submissions to the Service, you give Google a perpetual, irrevo-
cable, worldwide, royalty-free, and nonexclusive license to reproduce, adapt, modify,




 http://www.apple.com/privacy
 2
 http://images.apple.com/legal/sla/docs/iphone.pdf
3  To Volunteer or to Contribute Locational Information? Towards Truth in…           37


translate, publish, publicly perform, publicly display, distribute, and create derivative
works of the User Submission. You conﬁrm and warrant to Google that you own or have
all of the necessary rights or permissions to grant this license. You also grant to end users

of Google services the right to access and use, including the right to edit, the User
Submissions as permitted under the applicable Google terms of service. 3
   Twitter’s location service provides an example of opt-in provision (Trapani
2009). To use its location services, users have to explicitly choose to utilize the

location service; by default it is unavailable. In the case of crowdsourced geographic
information, data collected by OpenStreetMap (OSM) mapping parties offers an
example of volunteered geographic information, compared to the geographic informa-
tion contributed through Google’s Map Maker. The legal differences reﬂect aib    tiiels to

clarify and control collection and reuse of crowdsourced geographic information.
   While there are many complexities in every example of crowdsourced data that
impact the scope of opt-in or opt-out provisions, the legal distinction between opt-in
(volunteered) and opt-out (contributed) licenses also touches on afundamental ethical
understanding about volunteering (Cloke et al. 2007). Many people maintain that

volunteering comes with an explicit understanding of what we are contributing, how
we are contributing, and future possibilities of the collected information’s uses. This
widely held attitude towards volunteering to crowdsource information in manytu     crls
reﬂects a pragmatic understanding of the control a person has over all volunteered

actions. The ease of data reuse necessitates extending this pragmatic understanding
to include recognition of possible future reuses.
   Opting-in agreements clarify to collectors of crowdsourced information the
speciﬁcs of how the data they agree to provide is collected and indicates the possi-
bilities for reuse. This agrees with widelaccepted principles of volunteering. Opt-out

provisions may be clear but often are totalizing in scope; their acceptance involves
the loss of control and inﬂuence over the collection and uses of information. This
difference speaks to the practical importance of distinguishing crowdsourced infor-
mation collected by people actively deciding tc oollect data, and hving somemeasure

of control, from crowdsourced data collected automatically   or with a clearabrogation
of possibilities to inﬂuence the collection and also reuse of the data.



   3.4      Truth in Labeling


Clariﬁcation of the nature of crowdsourced geographic information can begin with
the distinction between contributed and volunteered geographic information (CGI

and VGI). The different labels help indicate the provenance. Provenance is a term
widely used in e-Science and by librarians and information professionals to refer to
attributes of the source of information that allow for assessment of the materials
(Simmhan et al. 2005; Moreau et al. 2008; Cheney et al. 2009 ) . It helps distinguish



 http://www.google.com/mapmaker/map ﬁ les/s/terms_mapmaker.html
38                                                                          F. Harvey


the ﬁtness for use and opens possibilities to assess lax standards in data collection
and processing and possible malfeasance. Assessing data provenance is a funm  dental
issue that surfaced in the late 1980s and early 1990s in developing geographic infor-
mation metadata (Lanter   1991; Smith 1996; Bowker 2000; Harvey 2002; West and

Hess 2002). How we share data when we lack ﬁrst-hand knowledge of the measure-
ments and processes used to collect and prepare the data is complicated (Goodchild
1992; Goodchild 1995), but users will want to avoid this complexity and still, how-
ever, know they can trust the data (Harvey    2003). With the development of the
Internet, the ways we can account for complexities remain limited (Chrisman1994 ;

West and Hess 2002; Tosta 1999). In this sense, the truth-in-labeling concept refers
to the scientiﬁc empirical approach to assuring that information about the origin,
processing, and current status of the data are made available and ensuring that data
can be assessed whenever needed to determine its quality (Chrisman 1999 ) .
   Truth in labeling is simply a principle, in relationship to the provenance of
crowdsourced geographic information, to record and make accessible characteris-

tics of the collection, processing, and reuses of information to existing and potential
users. As part of provenance, the distinction between CGI and VGI is an important
truth-in-labeling indicator for potential users about quality and potential biases.
   Objections to this approach may arise due to the cost and time it will take to
collect and make information about geographic information provenance available.

These objections speak to important practical issues but should be balanced by the
consideration of how long it will take users to assess the suitability of the data when
they have to meticulously determine data quality in relationship to prospective uses.
Considering the many uses of each geographic information source, the multiplier
for the cost and time of each group determining quality can make this a more

considerable undertaking that far outstrips the cosand time of thecreator toprovide
provenance information. Certainly, distinguishing VGI from CGI will not add much
effort or time to the preparation of metadata.
   Other objections may arise in the complexities and lack of a sharp line between
CGI and VGI. For instance, a corporate-organized or even corporate-supported

OSM mapping party would be for some an example of CGI, even if the mappers
volunteered. In their eyes, the corporate inﬂuence constitutes a bias that can be both
explicit and implicit. The CGI/VGI distinction may not be in accord with every
person’s ideology or perceptions, but it remains an accessible way to distinguish the
type of collection and to clarify other questions about provenance.



   3.5      Towards Truth in Labeling for Crowdsourced

       Geographic Information


Knowing if crowdsourced data is CGI or VGI can be very helpful in assessing
crowdsourced geographic information for continued or new reuses. A scenario
where a local activist group draws on OSM data to show the location of squats, only
3  To Volunteer or to Contribute Locational Information? Towards Truth in…          39


to ﬁnd out that the OSM data has been volunteered by people working for the police,
shows the possibility of manipulation and the importance of knowing not only who
collected the data but also the provenance of the data. A scenario where crowd-

sourced data for neighborhood shops and mobile food stands has been collected by
the merchants or by people working for the agents offers another example where
knowing the nature of the data’s origin is important. Distinguishing CGI from VGI
cannot answer all questions about provenance and ﬁtness for use, but following the
principle of truth in labeling is a start to distinguish the primary relationship of

people involved in collecting data to their role in data collection.
   The main argument of this chapter is that truth in labeling and making the dis-
tinction for crowdsourced geographic information between VGI and CGI support
needs to determine provenance, assess data quality, and support the assessment of
possible use of lax standards and malfeasance. The determination of different levels

of clarity and control relies on distinctions in terms of data collection and data
reuses. The complexity of crowdsourced data is multifaceted. Uploads of photo-
graphs with locational information to Flickr are simply not the same as taking part
in an OpenStreetMap mapping party. Nor is logging in to a Foursquare account
toﬁnd recommended local restaurants the same as receiving unsolicited SMS

advertisements with coupons for nearby food trucks, based on one’s cell phone
provider selling location data to marketing companies.
   Clarity and control over the information individuals provide are larger issues
than crowdsourced geographic information. They are part of mobile technology
uses involving crowdsourced data and discussions about location privacy. Since

it is impossible to exhaustively determine the reuses of geographic information
in advance, it seems very relevant to ensure that future users are able to assess
and qualify data, starting with a distinction between geographic information that
has been contributed (CGI) and geographic information that has been volun-

teered (VGI).
   Distinguishing CGI from VGI is more than academic. As part of evident and
growing concerns about privacy, the distinction helps geographic information
collectors and users distinguish on theﬂy a key parameter of data quality (Duval
et al.2002; Kim 1999; Tsou 2002)without overwhelming them with the details

necessary for thorough consideration. The CGI and VGI distinction signals a funda-
mental difference that analysis of the other provenance information – about the
who, what, when, where, why, and how of the geographic information in question –
should serve to clarify.
   Truth in labeling is a principle for clearly distinguishing CGI and VGI during

creation and distribution of crowdsourced data. While the underlying position and
attribute accuracy issues are complex, usage of the terms allows for the easy dif-
ferentiation of geographic information collected withdirect human control, and
broad understanding of possible reuses, from geographic information collected
withoutdirect human control and with limited or even no knowledge of reuses.

Adoption of this distinction would be an important ﬁrst step in clarifying the origins
of crowdsourced geographic information for users and further creators.
 40                                                                             F. Harvey


    3.6      Summary and Conclusions


 Volunteered geographic information is only and just that. Other types of crowd-
 sourced geographic information collected by automated sensors, as part of other
 activities or under opt-out agreements, are contributed geographic information.
 Distinguishing volunteered and contributed as ethical concepts is an important way

 to move forward with less ambiguity.
    In particular, this is related to privacy and liability. Dan Sui has expressed the
 centrality of privacy and liability issues among the concerns for VGI (Sui       2008 ) ,
 asking important questions about how VGI will develop in the changing computer

 networked ecosystem. Some choices to consider now and in the future include the
 following: When we create geographic information, how are we taking privacy
 issues into consideration and clarifying both the context and modes through which

 geographic information was collected and could be used? When we use crowd-
 sourced geographic information, how are we assessing the context and modes of
 data collection and preparation?
    The chapter by J. Dobson (Chap.        1) in this volume discusses relevant data

 quality problems in greater depth than this chapter. A potentially fruitful way to
 merge the CGI and VGI distinction lies in publishing data quality assessments and
 linking them to metadata in repositories as additional detail to the fundamental CGI/

 VGI difference in labels. As D. Colman discusses using this approach for conventional
 topographic base mapping in his chapter in this volume. Clariﬁcations of data quality
 can help with the assessment ofﬁtness for use and also inform potential users of
 scale-related differences and potential lax adherence to accuracy standards or even

 potential malfeasance. The decision to incur charges for using licensed data may ﬁnd
 support if clarity of documentation and of informationprovenance facilitates greater
 clarity and control for individuals who collect the data.


  AcknowledgementsIn addition to helpful comments and discussion at the 2011 workshop in
 Seattle, the comments of two anonymous reviewers and editors have been very helpful in improving
 this chapter.




     References

 Acohido, B. (2011). Privacy implications of ubiquitous digital seUSA Today , January 26,
    2011, P1B.
 Biermann, K. (2011). Betrayed by our own data. Die Zeit Online, March 26, 2011.//www.zeit.

    de/digital/datenschutz/2011–03/data-protection-malte-spitzessed August 26, 2011.
 Blakemore, M., & Longhorn, R. (2004). Ethics and GIS: The practitioner’s dilemma. InAGI 2004
    Conference Workshop on GIS Ethics .
Bowker, G. C. (2000). The world of biodiversity: Data and metadataInternational Journal of
    Geographical Information Science, 14 (8), 739–754.
 Cheney, J., Chiticariu, L., & Tan, W. C. (2009). Provenance in databases: Why, how, and where.
    Foundations and Trends in Databases, 1 (4), 379–474.
 Chrisman, N. R. (1994). Metadata required to determine the ﬁtness of spatial data for use in envi-
    ronmental analysis. In W. K. Michener, J. W. Brunt, & S. G. Stafford (EEnvironmental
  3  To Volunteer or to Contribute Locational Information? Towards Truth in…                     41


     information management and analysis: Ecosystem to global scales (pp. 177–190). London:

     Taylor and Francis.
  Chrisman, N. R. (1999). Speaking truth to power: An agenda for change. In K. Lowell & A. Jaton
     (Eds.), Spatial accuracy assessment. Land information uncertainty in natural resources         .
     Chelsea: Ann Arbor Press.

  Cloke, P., Johnsen, S., & May, J. (2007). Ethical citizenship? Volunteers and the ethics of providing
     services for homeless people. Geoforum, 38 (6), 1089–1101.
    Critchley, S. (2007I).ﬁnitely demanding: Ethics of commitment, politics of resistance . London:
     Verso.

 Dobson, J. E., & Fisher, P. F. (2003). Geoslavery. IEEE Technology and Society Magazine, 22 (1),
     47–52.
  Duval, E., Hodgkins, W., Sutton, S., eibel, S. L. et al. (200. etadata principles andpracticalities.
     D-Lib Magazine 8 (4).  http://dlib.org/dlib/april02/weibel/04weibel.html.

  Elwood, S., & Leszczynski, A. (2011). Privacy, reconsidered: New representations, data practices,
     and the Geoweb. GeoJournal, 42 (1), 6–15.
Goodchild, M.F. (1992). Sharing imperfect data. Available on-line at:         http://www.geog.ucsb.
     edu/~good/papers/228.pdf   . Accessed August 26, 2011

 Goodchild, M. F. (1995). Sharing imperfect data. In H. J. Onsrud & G. Rushton (Eds.),      Sharing
     geographic information (pp. 413–425). New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press.
 Goodchild, M. F. (2007). Citizens as voluntary sensors: Spatial data infrastructure in the world of
     Web2.0. International Journal of Spatial Data Infrastructures Research, 2 , 24–32.

  Harvey, F. (2002). Visualizing data quality through interactive metadata browsing in a VR enmviotn.
     In P. F. Fisher & D. Unwin (Eds.), Re-presenting GIS. Chichester: Wiley.
 Harvey, F. (2003). Developing geographic information infrastructures for local government: The
     role of trust. The Canadian Geographer, 47 (1), 28–37.

  Harvey, F. (2012). Practical ethics for professional geographers. In M. Solem, K. Foote, & J. Monk
     (Eds.), Practicing geography: Careers for enhancing society and the environment        . Upper
     Saddle River: Pearson Prentice Hall.
 Kim, T. J. (1999). Metadata for geo-spatial data sharing: A comparative analysis.   The Annals of

     Regional Science, 33 (2), 171–181.
    Kwame, A. A. (200E   8x).periments in ethics. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
 Lanter, D. P. (1991). Design of a lineage meta-database for GIS.    Cartography and Geographic
     Information Systems, 18 (4), 255–261.

 Liptak, A. (2011). Court case asks if ‘Big Brother’ is spelled GPS. The New York Times , online.
      http://www.nytimes.com/2011/09/11/us/11gps.html. Accessed August 26, 2011.
  Moreau, L., Groth, P., Miles, S., Vazquez, J., Ibbotson, J., Jiang, S., Munroe, S., Rana, O., Schreiber,
     A., Tan, V., & Varga, L. (2008). The provenance of electronic data.    Communications of the

     ACM, 51 (4), 52–58.
    National Research Council. (200P   7)u.tting people on the map: Protecting conﬁdentiality with
     linked social-spatial data. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
  Onsrud, H. (1995). Identifying unethical conduct in the use of GIS. Cartography and Geographic

     Information Systems, 22 (1), 90–97.
  Onsrud, H. (1997). Ethical issues in the use and development of GIS. Paper read at GIS/LIS’97 .
 Pew Research Center (2010). The future of online socializing.    http://pewresearch.org/pubs/1652/
     social-relations-online-experts-predict-future Accessed August 26, 2011.

Pogue, D. (2011). Wrapping up the Apple location brouhaha.          http://pogue.blogs.nytimes.com/
     2011/04/28/wrapping-up-the-apple-location-brouhaha/?pagemode=print      . Accessed August 26,
     2011.
Samuelson, P. (n.d.). Privacy as intellectual property?    http://people.ischool.berkeley.edu/~pam/

     papers/privasip_draft.pdf. Accessed August 26, 2011.
 Simmhan, Y. L., Plale, B., & Gannon, D. (2005). A survey of data provenance in e-science. ACM
     SIGMOD Record, 34 (3), 31–36.
  Smith, T. R. (1996). The meta-information environment of digital libraries.D-Lib Magazine (July/
     August).  http://dlib.org/dlib/july96/new/07smith.html.
 42                                                                                       F. Harvey


 Sui, D. (2008). The wikiﬁcation of GIS and its consequences: Or Angelina Jolie’s new tattoo and

    the future of GIS. Computers, Environment & Urban Systems, 32 , 1–5.
Tosta, N. (1999). NSDI was supposed to be a verb. In B. Gittings (Ed.),       Innovations in GIS 6
    (pp. 3–24). London: Taylor and Francis.
Trapani, G. (2009). Details on Twitter’s imminent geolocation launch. Smarterware.org        . http://

    smarterware.org/3419/details-on-twitters-imminent-geolocation-support-launch
Tsou, M.-H. (2002). An operational metadata framework for searching, indexing, and retrieving
    distributed geographic information services on the Internet. In M. J. Egenhofer, & D. M. Mark
    (Eds.), Proceedings, geographic information science.       Second International Conference,

    GIScience 2002, Boulder, CO, USA, September 2002. New York: Springer.
 West, L. A., Jr., & Hess, T. J. (2002). Metadata as a knowledge management tool: Supporting intel-
    ligent agent and end user access to spatial data. Decision Support Systems, 32 , 247–264.
   Chapter 4
Metadata Squared: Enhancing Its Usability

for Volunteered Geographic Information

and the GeoWeb



   Barbara S. Poore           and    Eric B. Wolf







                           Arguably, given the rich interactivity of geographic information,
                           usability applies not only to the systems but also to the content
                           of those systems: the structure and portrayal of the data and
                           metadata within them. This is where the usability industry is
                           relatively weak, and therefore where one of the biggest research
                           challenges lies.
                                                               (Davies et al. 2005)

                           In the earlier world dominated by paper maps the body of
                           information described by metadata was a single map, and an
                           intimate association existed between a map’s contents and
                           its marginalia. In the digital world, however, the concept of
                           a data set is much more ﬂuid.
                                                                (Goodchild 2007a)



 AbstractThe Internet has brought manychanges to the way geographicinformation
is created and shared. One aspect that has not changed is metadata. Static spatial
data quality descriptions were standardized in the mid-1990s and cannot accom-

modate the current climate of data creation where nonexperts are using mobile
phones and other location-based devices on a continuous basis to contribute data to
Internet mapping platforms. The usability of standard geospatial metadata is being
questioned by academics and neogeographers alike. This chapter analyzes current

discussions of metadata to demonstrate how the media shift that is occurring
has af fected requirements for metadata. Two case studies of metadata use are
presented—online sharing of environmental information through a regional spatial
data infrastructure in the early 2000s, and new types of metadata that are being

used today in OpenStreetMap, a map of the world created entirely by volunteers.



  B. S. Poor) ( E. B. Wolf
  Center of Excellence in GIScience , U.S. Geological Survey, Saint Petersburg , FL , USA
e-mail: bspoore@usgs.gov ; ebwolf@usgs.gov


D. Sui et al. (eds.), Crowdsourcing Geographic Knowledge: Volunteered Geographic
Information (VGI) in Theory and Practice, DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-4587-2_4,
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
44                                                             B.S. Poore and E.B. Wolf


Changes in metadata requirements are examined for usability, the ease with which
metadata supports coproduction of data by communities of users, how metadata
enhances ﬁndability, and how the relationship between metadata and data has changed.

We argue that traditional metadata associated with spatial data infrastructures is
inadequate and suggest several research avenues to make this type of metadata more
interactive and effective in the GeoWeb.



    4.1      Introduction


Geospatial metadata is commonly referred to as data about data. Metadata describes
the content, quality, and origins of a geospatial data set. According to the US Federal
Geographic Data Committee (FGDC), which pioneered geospatial metadata stan-
dards in the 1990s, metadata was critical for the online delivery of data, allowing
users toﬁnd, understand, and reuse data sets produced by others (FGDC          2000 ) .

Metadata allowed organizations to better manage their investments in geospatial
data and provide information to online catalogs and clearinghouses (FGDC 2000 ) .
The metadata standards were developed when the Internet was in its infancy, but
since then, the use of the Internet as a medium of communication and exchange
among data producers and users has burgeoned. Metadata has taken on a more vital

role in locating and managing the enormous amounto   sf geospatial data now available
in the GeoWeb (Scharl and Tochterman 2007; Tsou 2002 ) .
   There is evidence that many whowork with geospatial datasets considermetadata
inconvenient, complex, and difﬁcult to produce, creating a “metadata bottleneck”

(Batcheller et al. 2009; Batcheller 2008; Tsou 2002 ) . Although GIS professionals
may acknowledge the importance of metadata, it often falls off the working agenda.
The paradox of metadata is that while the costs accrue to the data-producing
organization, many of the beneﬁts accrue to the users (National Research Council
2001). Data producers have encouraged their employees to generate metadata by

various means: simple ﬁat—thou shalt write metadata; providing specialized meta-
data tools; and in some cases by not allwing data to be submittedto asystem-absent
completed metadata. Despite these efforts, many data sets lack associated metadata
(for a recent example, see Hennig et al. 2011 ) .
   If metadata is a usability issue for data producers, it is equally so for the end

user. In an online discussion in 2010 about geospatial metadata in the GeoWeb
(Fee 2010), a commenter points out that the usability of metadata for discovering
the contents of a geospatial data ﬁlean be critically impactedby somethingassimple
as the title of the data set:

   Improve how the metadata Title isconstructed. This sounds so basic, but it’s really important
   over time. Somehow require the user to create a human friendly Title for their data right up
   front, so that the metadata doesn’t default to some cryptic ﬁle name. (Haddad

   The producer/user disconnect has been recognized as a key reason that metadata
may impact the usability of geospatial data sets (Comber et al. 2008 ) . The Federal
Geographic Data Committee was advised to improve the usability of geospatial
metadata by structuring data-sharing partnerships to bring data producers and users
4  Metadata Squared: Enhancing Its Usability for Volunteered Geographic…          45


into closer alignment (National Research Council 2001). But the usability problem
does not just consist of the binary of expert producers and nonexpert users; there is
a third element, technology (Moore 2010). Moreover, Internet technologies now

permit users to become the producers of geospatial data (Coleman et al.        2009 ;
Budhathoki et al. 2008). Experts understand controlled vocabularies and domains,
but their solutions do not scale. Users understand local contexts and use cases, and
they are more numerous than experts, but they do not necessarily understand expert
vocabularies and domains. Machines can process large volumes of data and can be

programmed to identify and process structured data, but they are poor at interpretation
and contextual meaning.
   This chapter examines how new types of metadata, spawned in the technology-
mediated shift from the paper world to the online world, might lead to a more usable,
interactive model for metadata. This interactive model would result from active

negotiation among expert data producers, machines—deﬁned here as structured
programs or software—and data users who are empowered by software to produce
data for themselves. This new model overturns the traditional view of metadata
in which information about the data set is simply conveyed through a transparent
communication system from expert to users (Poore and Chrisman 2006 ) .

   The impetus for examining the role of metadata in the GeoWeb resulted from
a project the USGS undertook in 2010 to test whether volunteered geographic
information (Goodchild 2007b)could be incorporated into          The National Map
( www.nationalmap.go)vof the USGS (Wolf et al.2011). This ongoing project is using
the database structure and the editor Potlatch 2, developed by the OpenStreetMap

(OSM) community, to collect and manage geospatial data produced by volunteers.
OSM is an open-source street map of the world, created and maintained entirely by
volunteers (www.openstreetmap.org   ). To support simultaneous useby manydifferent
users and to record a complete history ofall edits, the OSMdatabase stores metadata

at the level of the node, which many institutional GIS do not.
   In researching the technical aspects of how elements of open and crowdsourced
projects can be adapted to the needs of spatial data infrastructures (Onsrud 2007 ) ,
the authors noted a recent uptick in theoretical discussions of metadata in both the
formal GIScience literature and informal discussions online in what we are calling

the geoblogosphere. A search of the Web of Science index shows papers on geospa-
tial metadata increased from 1 to 2 per year to an average of 5 or more per year in
2004, perhaps reﬂecting an increasing interest in ontologies (e.g., Rodriguez et al.
2005). The geoblogosphere is decidedly nonacademic, but it too has been the site of
prolonged discussions of metadata. A blog post by Fee2(010 ) “Let’s Save Metadata”

attracted attention from both GIS professionals and so-called neogeographers
(Turner 2006) who are recasting the role of mapping on the Internet. These recent
journal articles and blog discussions form the backdrop against which we evaluate
how metadata is being remade in the age of the GeoWeb.
   Our thesis is that there are qualitative differences between today’s collaborative

online mapping projects and the previous generation of multi-institutional data-
sharing projects—spatial data infrastructures. We consider geographic information
and metadata to be media for communication (McLuhan 1964; Sui and Goodchild
2001, 2011; Sui2008) and explore the relationship between the new media practices
46                                                            B.S. Poore and E.B. Wolf


being developed by the community of neogeographers and the efforts of traditional
mapping endeavors such as The National Map to incorporate citizen contributions.
   Media shifts have been profound, and yet metadata practices have not changed
much since the mid-1990s. We categorize media changes that metadata might need

to undergo in four areas:
 Usability—a quality attribute describing how easy it is for the user to interact

   with a program or piece of software (Nielsen and Loranger    2006 ) .
 Support for coproduction of data by communities of users—the recognition that
   nontraditional users of geospatial data, whether called neogeographers or “citi-
   zens as sensors” (Goodchild 2007b), are producing and sharing large quantities
   of geospatial data online. This is related to changes that have been characterized

   as Web 2.0 (O’Reilly2005 ) . This media sh   rifqtuires metadata tomatch thescale
   and dynamism of the current GeoWeb, reﬂecting the simultaneous edits of large
   volumes of data and supporting applications enabled by online sensor networks
   and location-based services (Pultar et al. 2010 ) .
 Shifts in requirements for ﬁ ndability—that is, “the degree to which a particular
   object is easy to discover or locate” (Morville 2005: 4), applicable to both indi-

   vidual objects and systems.
    Alteredrelationships between data and metadata—the idea that in the disorder
   that is the current Internet, everything is data (Weinberger 2007 ) ; metadata and
   geospatial data are no longer distinguishable.

    To examine changing attitudes to metadata, we draw on online sources, interviews,
and case studies from information-sharing communities both before and after the
so-called Web 2.0 revolution. We consider how metadata enhances the usability of

geospatial data and how metadata itself may have to change to accommodate the
media shift. The ﬁrst case comes from a study of information sharing by a number
of groups in the Paciﬁc Northwest in the late 1990s as they constructed a regional
spatial data infrastructure to help remediate environmental conditions responsible
for the decline of native salmon stocks (Poore 2003). The second study is based on

a content analysis of online discussions by volunteer neogeographers as they debate
metadata and use an open-source mapping platform to map the streets and buildings
of Haiti in the aftermath of the 2010 Haitian earthquake. Finally, we suggest
alternatives to current metadata paradigms that might bring data producers, data
users, and technology together into one interactive system in which users have more
input into the production of metadata.



   4.2      Background


The Content Standard for Geospatial Metadata (CSDGM) (FGDC               1994 ) was
developed and promoted by the Federal Geographic Data Committee (FGDC) in
the mid-1990s on the cusp of the Internet era. It was further adapted and published

as a standard while retaining its essential form (International Organization for
Standardization 2003). The metadata standard was primarily intended to help large
4   Metadata Squared: Enhancing Its Usability for Volunteered Geographic…          47


organizations manage their geospatial data holdings; accommodating the end user
was a lesser goal. The metadata standard codiﬁed common elements to describe
geospatial data including data set identiﬁcation, data quality, data set organization,
spatial references, entity and attribute information, distribution constraints, and

information about the metadata producer (FGDC          2000 ) . In media transitions,
new media often borrow and repurpose the forms of old media. Because the CSDGM
straddled the paper and the digital eras, it cobbled together elements of two earlier
media forms, the library card and the map collar.




   4.2.1      The Library Model of Metadata

The card in the card catalog of a traditional library contained metadata about a
physical object—the book—but the card was just a pointer to the book. It said little

about the content of the book. Once the reader had located the book on the shelf, she
or he had no further need for the metadata—the bookwas the content. The CSDGM
and its descendants were built using a structured language based on the Standard
Generalized Markup Language (International Organization for Standardization
1986), adapted from the library community (FGDC 2006; Goodchild et al. 2007 ) .

In the metadata standard, information about how the data set should be described
was rigidly speciﬁed by logically constrained production rules that identiﬁed
each permitted element (or ﬁeld such as “keyword”), how the elements ﬁt together,
which elements were compound, which couldrepeat, which wererequired, andwhat
expressions were permitted within each element.

    This structure allowed metadata recordtso be parsed bymachine. Metadatadescrib-
ing data sets housed on distributed servers were indexed and stored in a centralized
registry or digital card catalog (FGDC 2006) called a clearinghouse or portal. The
contents of these spatial data portals were frequently not exposed to the Internet at
large to be passively crawled by spiders and indexed for full-text searching by text

engines. Rather, spatial data portals became specialized for geographic information and
relied on the logical structure of the metadata to facilitate precise searches. For exam-
ple, a user could specify a land-use data set in Florida from 2009 using the keywords
from the metadata record and receive just the data set she or he required without having
to wade through a million documents from a Google search on the open Web.
   A big problem for the library model is the constant need for updating and main-

taining the catalog (Li et al.2010). Furthermore, producing metadata that will meet
the requirements of a complex and highly structured standard with 334 elements
is hard. The “added rigor” of adhering to the production rules exacts a huge price in
human labor (Shirky   2005a). Due to the persistent legacy of the library model and
the complexity of the standard, metadata has typically been managed quite sep  rately

from geospatial databases. This has led to an expanding role for metadata managers
or curators who extract metadata from the actual data producers and resolve data
integration issues (Millerand and Bowker 2009; Schuurman 2009 ) . This tends to
distance the metadata from both the data producer and the user.
48                                                            B.S. Poore and E.B. Wolf


   4.2.2      The Map Model of Metadata


Having found the record of a potential dataset, the user will want furtherinformation
about the quality of the data it describes as well as information on how to obtain it.
This is where the CSGDM departs from the library model. The metadata points to
the data, but once one has the metadata, one still does not have the data. Maps and

the geospatial data derived from them do not yield everything a user needs to know,
the former due to its status as an image, the latter because it is expressed in machine
language; thus, metadata takes on an explanatory role in addition to its pointing
function. Like the map collar or legend, metadata contains information about the
contents and quality of the data set.
   In the paper world, the map collar provides additional information on the author,

location, map scale, the subject, the symbols used, etc. But even the most detailed
legend cannot adequately “explain” a map (Wood et al.     2010 ) . Most map legends
obliterate the traces of the work practices that went into making the map, compressing
the map information into numbers and other symbols (Latour        1999 ) . Strictly in
terms of processing data, metadata is a narrative form (ﬁrst we did this, then that).

In theory it can be expansive, describing work processes in detail, but in practice,
like the map collar, it often fails to adequately explain the genesis of the data to an
outside user. In standard FGDC metadata, narrative explanations of work practices
are chopped into data elements and separated from the geospatial database as surely
as though the map collar had been cut away. The severing of metadata from the data

can lead to user confusion in the GeoWeb.
   The library catalog as a ﬁnding aid depends on the separation of metadata from
the data, but this separation induces new usability problems for the user as well as
rendering the metadata incapable of reﬂecting the rapid change to database transac-
tions in real time. To suit the media changes that have accompanied the GeoWeb,
metadata must become interactive and embedded directly with the data, reﬂecting

changes from data producers and users alike.



   4.2.3      Interactive, Embedded Metadata in the Digital Age


Amazon.com provides a model for how metadata operates in the online world and
demonstrates the three-cornered relationship of producer, user-producer, and tech-
nology. A search for a book on Amazon will result in a virtual page that contains descrip-
tive metadata similar to that in a traditional library card catalog—typically title, author,

publisher, and publication date. This descriptive metadata points not to the physical copy
of the book but to information about how to purchase a physical or digital copy of the
book, much as in the FGDC model. In addition, Amazon supplies professional reviews
of the book, suggests additional books the user might like based on their past purchasing
behavior and the behavior of other users, and allows the user to easily save a link to

information about the book to a “wish list.” By linking user behavior—search terms and
4  Metadata Squared: Enhancing Its Usability for Volunteered Geographic…         49


purchasing decisions—directly to the book page, Amazon is using transactional
user-centered metadata to enhance usability of the site. In addition, Amazon has sup-
plied a means for users to interact with each other around books by having user reviews
and user lists linked to the page. This ever-expanding universe of explanatory and trans-

actional information, much of it generated by the site’s users, is metadata, even though
it is not formalized or authoritative. This miscellaneous explanatory information is
networked on top of a uniﬁed platform that supports multiple simultaneous edits.
   Amazon behaves somewhat like a physical library in that the page about the book
(metadata) points to the location where the book can be found. But the book has,

in many cases, also been digitized. As the instance of a physical book, the digital
book can also be called metadata because it is not the “real” book in much the same
way that the map is not the territory (Korzybski   1933: 58). There is no longer a
distinction between data and metadata. As Goodchild 2 (007a, above) noted, not only
is the concept of a data set ﬂuid, so is the concept of metadata. In fact, metadata is
spatial data (Chrisman 1994). Search provides a way into the information about the

book, but the other metadata is accessed throughlinks. Thus in the user’s experience,
Amazon avails itself of the model of the Internet. The way Amazon deploys medta ata
as a rich context of explanatory information follows the new media model described
above. Metadata about the book enhances usability, is produced by communities of
users, and enhances ﬁndability of related information.



   4.3      Formal and Informal Discussions of Metadata


Two seemingly opposed themes—that geospatial metadata is not simple enough but
at the same time not complex enough—appear in present-day metadata discussions.
The former is most apparent in the neogeography community; the latter among

academics. These are essentially usability issues, though they are different in kind.
As Goodchild notes (2007a, quoted above), the digital age has rendered distinctions
between data and metadata more slippery. In distributed online mapping systems,
usability is a more complex problem than just making a map interface easier and
more intuitive to use. Usability must stat ith the data and theirmetadata (seeDavies
et al. 2005, quoted above).



   4.3.1      “Let’s Save Metadata”: Neogeographers


A challenge “Let’s save metadata” was recently posted on a geoblog (Fee      2010 ) .
Fee’s main complaint is the lack of usability in the FGDC standard, and he cites the
human/machine dichotomy. Producing metadata following the standard and reading

the typical metadata record are hard. Servers can use XML to talk to each other.
“But servers rarely read and write metadata on their own without human interaction.
Thus the reality of the situation is we poor humanshave to ingestand parsemetadata
regularly < XML > YIKES < ?XML>” (Fe2       e010). An example of this is the XML
50                                                                B.S. Poore and E.B. Wolf


   <?xml version="1.0" encoding="ISO - 8859 - 1"?>

   < ! DOCTYPE metadata SYSTEM "http : // www . fgdc. gov/ metadata/ fgdc - std -
   001 - 1998 . dtd">
   <metadata>
        <idinfo>
                   <citation>

                              <citeinfo>
                                         <origin>University of Florida GeoPlan
   Center</origin>
                                         <pubdate>20101220</pubdate>
                                         <title>GENERALIZED LAND USE DERIVED

   FROM 2010 PARCELS - FLORIDA DOT DISTRICT 7</title>
                                         <geoform>vector digital data</geoform>
                                         <pubinfo>
                                                    <pubplace>Gainesville,
   FL</pubplace>
                                                    <publish>University
                                                                              of Florida
   GeoPlan Center</publish>
                                         </pubinfo>
                                         <othercit>FDOT District 7</othercit>
                                         <onlink>http ://www.fgdl.org</ onlink>
                                         <lworkcit>

                                                    <citeinfo>
                                                               <othercit>Source -
   2010 Automated    -  2010</othercit>
                                                    </ citeinfo>
                                         </ lworkcit>

                                         < ftname
   Sync="TRUE">ETAT.D7_LU_GEN_2010</ftname></ citeinfo>
                   </ citation>

 Fig. 4.1Snippet of XML code of the metadata for a land-use map of Florida downloaded from the
University of Florida GeoPlan Center




expression of a land-use data set downloaded from the Florida GeoPlan Center

(Fig. 4.1). In practice, this formatis rarely encountered—morefrequently the meta-
data is rendered by the machine in a more common indented format (Fig.               4.2 ),

but even this more approachable format demands that the reader do most of the
work of decoding the questions she or he wants to ask about the data set.

   What matters to users are answers to the who, what, when, where, how and why
questions, but “those questions are hard to parse out of metadata” (Fee 2010 ) . This

discussion about the usability of metadata and what users really want essentially
rehashes those of the mid-1990s when the    metadata standard wasproposed, indicating

that there are unresolved usability issues that have persisted for nearly two decades
(Schweitzer 1998 ) .
   Professional GIS software such as ArcGIS automates the production of metadata

to some extent, although Fee rightly observes that current GIS software could do a
better job at this. Furthermore, many of the people commenting on this blog online

do not use professional GIS software. Many of the 72 responses can be identiﬁed
with the tenets of neogeography, although there were also some responses from
4   Metadata Squared: Enhancing Its Usability for Volunteered Geographic…                51


GENERALIZED LAND USE DERIVED FROM 2010
PARCELS -FLORIDA DOT DISTRICT 7


Metadata also available as


Metadata:

   Identification_Information
  Data_Quality_Information
   Spatial_Data_Organization_Information
  Spatial_Reference_Information
   Entity_and_Attribute_Information
   Distribution_Information
   Metadata_Reference_Information

Identification_Information:

    Citation:
        Citation_Information:
            Originator: University of Florida GeoPlan Center
            Publication_Date: 20101220
            Title:
                GENERALIZED LAND USE DERIVED FROM 2010 PARCELS -FLORIDA
DOT DISTRICT 7
             Geospatial_Data_Presentation_Form: vector digital data
             Publication_Information:

                 Publication_Place: Gainesville, FL
                 Publisher: University of Florida GeoPlan Center

             Other_Citation_Details: FDOT District 7
             Online_Linkage:<http://www.fgdl.org>
             Larger_Work_Citation:

                 Citation_Information:

                     Other_Citation_Details: Source - 2010 Automated - 2010

 Fig. 4.2Metadata shown in Fig. 4.2 in indented format


individuals who could be called professional GIS users from the academia, the

industry, and the government.
   There was a general agreement that metadata needed to be simpler to produce

and make. One remark summed up many of the comments. “Unless a caveman can
do it, users won’t read or write meaningful metadata. And relevant metadata must

be stored and travel with the data” (Entchev 2010 ) .
   This last point—the necessity to store and transmit metadata with the data—

elicited a good deal of discussion on the geoblog. In our comparison of two case
studies, we show the difference between the standard approach to metadata that has

been developed by the professional GIS community in spatial data infrastructures,
and the approach of the open-source mapping community which is experimenting

with data structures that store metadata at the level of the individual data object.
   In an era of too much information,ﬁndability becomes preeminent (Morville

2005). Google has accustomed us to the idea that simple keyword searching (land
use, Florida) should be all that is necessary for the user to search for data, and
yet these ﬁelds are buried in an overly complex metadata structure (Gould 2006a ) .
52                                                           B.S. Poore and E.B. Wolf


In fact, if one does a Google search for “land use, Florida”, one comes up with
several FGDC metadata records near the top of the search, based most likely on
the “keyword” ﬁeld. So the original theory osftructured metadata was correctI.t can be
useful for ﬁndability. The problem in this case lies in the uneven adoption of the

standard and the issue of not exposing more metadata records to the Internet at large.
The need for compliance with a top-down  mandate may also ha vedoomedmetadata’s
potential. Alternative bottom-up, user-generated taxonomies or folksonomies
(Vander Wal  2007) may work better (Gould 2006b). Capturing and exploiting user
tags, which are the locally generated equivalent of the metadata standard’s keyword

ﬁelds, could potentially produce an emergent ontology that would aidﬁndability.
This issue is discussed further below using the example of OpenStreetMap.



   4.3.2      Metadata and Meaning: GIScience


There has also been an increase in academic papers on metadata since 2005. In his
review of the adoption and spread of metadata standards since the mid-1990s, Goodchild
 (2007a) calls for user-centric rather than producer-centric metadata, emphasizing easy-
to-understand measures of data quality and tools to assessﬁtness for users’ unique

purposes. This is in concert with the discussions in the neogeography community.
   On the other hand, several researchers havemoved in adifferent direction,calling
for more complexity, either a different kind of metadata or further metadata exten-
sions. These arguments largely center on the idea that metadata, as currently struc-
tured, does a poor job of capturing differing meanings, or semantics embodied in a

database (Comber et al. 2008 ) . Schuurman and Leszczyns2     ki06( ) have proposed
additional formal metadata categories for data semantics to assist data interoperability,
achieved through database ethnographies (Schuurman 2008 ) . Although machine
understanding of semantics, as embedded in metadata,might be desirable,extending
the metadata standard will complicate an already complex structure. Gahegan et al.

 (2009), in their work on community-based knowledge in cyberinfrastructures, ctaon
that ontologies alone cannot capture meaning because they ignore “use-casese,paove
data, social networks and workﬂows.”



   4.4      Metadata Top Down


Traditional metadata associated with spatial data infrastructures can be examined
according to the four criteria set out at the beginning of this chapter: Is itose?y tu
Does it reﬂect coproduction by a community of users? Does it enhance ﬁndability?

What is the relationship between data and metadata?
   In the late 1990s, federal and state agencies in the Paciﬁc Northwest of the USA
were building a shared, multi-organization regional data set of rivers and streams to
assist recovery planning for the 22 species of salmon that had been listed as enedearn
4  Metadata Squared: Enhancing Its Usability for Volunteered Geographic…          53


or threatened in 1999 (US Department of Commerce 1999 ) . Over 40 organizations
participated in the development of a common data model for hydrography (water)
data and built an online clearinghouse fashioned after the FGDC model (Poo2  re003 ) .




   4.4.1      Usability

The usability of traditional metadata is affected by the compression of work practices,

the modular structure of the metadata, and the separation of the metadata from the data.
Metadata aims to describe the products (data) of work practices (data analysis and data
production) that are mediated by technologies. These practices emerge from situated
learning when communities work together on particular problems (Lave and Wenger
1991). Situated knowledge, being primarily tacit knowledge developed over the course
of a project, is difﬁcult to translate for other communities. An example of what is lost

when working procedures are compressed into metadata can be seen in the records of
stream databases that were kept in the Paciﬁc Northwest Hydrography project.
   A metadata record of the stream layer from the Six Rivers National Forest19 (99 ) ,
which covers a large area of federal land in Northern California, demonstrates the
problem faced by these regional integrators. The process of producing the strealmyer

for the forest is described in the metadata, but the work details are of necessity
condensed. The early history of this data is omitted. The ultimate source of much of
the digital data on streams in the Paciﬁc Northwest was digital data derived from
the 1:24,000-scale USGS topographic maps in the early 1990s. These data, known
as digital line graphs (DLGs), were generalized to 1:100,000 scale and shared with

the US Forest Service and other agencies. But the data were inadequate for watsehred
level work; the generalizing process omitted much detail on intermittent and smaller
streams, and the maps from which the data were derived were out of date.
   To be useful at a local scale within the Six Rivers National Forest, the stream net-
work had to be densiﬁed—adding back in the stream information that had been

removed when the DLGs were created. The Forest relied on a then-current densiﬁcation
process called crenulation to delineate streams that were not included in the USGS
DLGs. The metadata refers to this process and includes a reference to existing practice
(Maxwell et al.1995). Crenulation is a process of inferring the course of stream chan-
nels by tracing the folds or crenulations down a slope on a contour map. This process
can be traced back to the scientiﬁc literature of the 1930s on geomorphology of stream

channels. Thus, a long history of scientiﬁc discovery and insight is compressed and
translated into the one word, “crenulation,” that appears in the metadata record. This
process of compression and translation is characteristic of the circulation of scientiﬁc
knowledge (Latour   1999), but in order to understand the how the data were created,
the user must dig into various scattered sources.

   Eventually, the original Six Rivers water data set was integrated into a larger data
set composed of all the stream layers in the Forest Service’s Paciﬁc Southwest Region
(US Department of Commerce2004). This metadata record shows further compres-
sion of data techniques and origins. A newer software-based modeling technique,
54                                                          B.S. Poore and E.B. Wolf


based onﬂow accumulation, was used to densify the streams in several of the
watersheds. The older ephemeral streams from the Six Rivers National Forest that
had been densiﬁed by the hand crenulation method were discarded. The link back-
ward to the Maxwell method was severed. Severed as well are the work practices of

a previous community that drew on a long tradition of local observation and scientiﬁc
knowledge. Does the end user of the integrated data set need to know the back story
of crenulation? Perhaps not, depending on the use to which the data set is put, but the
new metadata emphatically warns that there is not necessarily a link between what
the data set portrays and what was directly observed in the watershed:

   IT MUST BE CLEARLY UNDERSTOOD THAT THIS DATA SET, AT THIS TIME, IS NOT
   INTENDED BY, NOR IS CAPABLE OF, DISPLAYING WHERE WATER IS ACTUALLY
   FLOWING ON THE LANDSCAPE.



   4.4.2      Community


It is not so easy to reconstruct the community that built these data sets of the
streams. This community is not reﬂected in the metadata. Nor is there any way to
recover the speciﬁc history of this data set. The “Time Period of Content”—a ﬁeld

in the metadata—only reﬂects the time at which the data set was produced. It is
static and does not reﬂect this long history of where the data or the production
techniques originated.



4.4.3 Findability and the Separation of Metadata from Data


As to ﬁndability, the results are mixed. We could not locate the original Six Rivers
National Forest data and the Maxwell reference through the National Forest website,

but we were able to ﬁnd the integrated Southwest Division metadata record discussed
above. After much searching through Google and other sites, we found an Esri geo-
database through the National Hydrography Dataset (www.nhd.gov). The reference
to the Maxwell process was preserved several layers deep in the geodatabase and
without citation of the relevant literature. Findability and usability suffer when the
history of the data is hard to reconstruct through the reorganization of the software

packages and processes by which the data have been conveyed to the user.



   4.4.4      Metadata Bottom Up or Metadata Squared


Digital media have spawned new practices for categorizing data. Classiﬁcation
practices that were adequate for the physical world, in which each unique object had
a unique place, have of necessity changed (Shirky 2005a). In the digital world, an
object can be in many places at once and can be “about” many different things at
 4  Metadata Squared: Enhancing Its Usability for Volunteered Geographic…         55


 the same time, leading to a proliferation of information. This proliferation demands
 networked user-generated classiﬁcations, a bottom-up ontology, a “new orderor ofer”
 (Weinberger 2007 ) .



   4.4.5      OpenStreetMap


OpenStreetMap (OSM) (       http://www.openstreetmap.org) was started by Steve
 Coast in 2004 (Wikipedia 2010). The goal of OSM is to make an all-volunteer
 online map of the world that will be free of use restrictions and open to all ( http://
 wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/FAQ). Anyone can edit the map, discuss the map, cre-

 ate tutorials and other explanatory material, freely access the data, and inﬂuence the
 future direction of the map. OSM volunteers are attracted to the project through
 engagement with the online data and mailing lists. Frequent mapping parties, held
 throughout the world, solidify the community byadding the face-to-face experience.
 A distinctive feature of the wiki software that underlies OSM is a history ohlnges
 to the map over time. OSM can be evaluated according to the same criteria used for

 evaluating traditional metadata: usability, coproduction by community, ﬁndability,
 and an altered relationship between data and metadata.
   In OSM, there is no longer any separation between map and collar, that is, the
 data and the metadata. This is a new type of mapping medium. The map becomes a
 platform or canvas on which the user is invited to draw, that is, to edit the map.

 Users are motivated to contribute to the map for various reasons (Budhathoki2010 ) ,
 including the strong user community, but a desire to assert creativity is important
 (Budhathoki 2010). The system supports almost instantaneous updates, validating
 the mapping platform as a creative endeavor.
    The data structure also gives the OSM community the ability to respond quickly

 to emergency situations in which better maps are needed. Volunteers from across
 the globe began mapping the street network in Haiti within hours of the earthquake
 in January 2010. Announcements on the OSM wiki, mailing lists, and social
 networking spread the word about the need for mappers. Face-to-face crisis camps
 brought together at least 700 mappers in cities around the world to map (Waters
 201).0High-quality satellite images released for public use by GeoEye and

 DigitalGlobe were the primary vehicles, along with old CIA maps from the 1940s,
 that volunteers used to trace streets and buildings in the damaged areas (Sil2010 ;
 Maron 2010). The resulting maps were used by many organizations in the response
 and recovery (Ball 2010). The community organized and coordinated itself entirely
 using the ancillary metadata that surrounds the map.



   4.4.6      Metadata Types


 There are two different types of metadata preserved by the OSM platform: object-
 level metadata and ancillary metadata; there is no overarching metadata document
 as in traditional geospatial data. Object-level metadata is incorporated directly into
56                                                            B.S. Poore and E.B. Wolf


the data structure, making no distinction between data and metadata (Weinberger
2007.) The data is very simple and expressed in XML. Data elements or data
primitives are nodes (a point expressed in latitude and longitude), ways (ordered

interconnection of nodes), and relations (sets of nodes or ways) ( http://wiki.open-
streetmap.org/wiki/Data_Primitives). The metadata identiﬁes the node, its coordi-
nates, the user who created the node, the editing session (changeset) of which it is a
part, the version number of the edit, and the date and time it was edited. Elements
can have any number of user-generated tags, consisting of a key and a value. Below

is an example of OSM metadata drawn form a user-created map of Port-au-Prince,
Haiti, in the aftermath of the earthquake.
    <node id = “613826766” lat = “18.5450619” lon = “-72.3305089” user = “samlar-
sen1” uid = “5974” visible = “true” version = “2” changeset = “3636891” time-
stamp = “2010-01-16 T23:34:34Z”>

   < tag k = “building” v = “collapsed”/>
   < tag k = “source” v = “GeoEye”/>
    </node>
   In this case, the node is identiﬁed as a building that is collapsed (e.g., tag
k=“building”, v=“collapsed”). The source is from a particular user, samlarsen1,

who digitized the node based on the GeoEye imagery of Haiti.
   Because OSM changes continually over time, sometimes quite rapidly as in the
Haitian earthquake crisis, object-level metadata is necessary. Object-level metadata
facilitates the communal character of map production. Changes to the map can be
tracked, and the history can be “rolled back” to a previous state easily if an error is

detected by another editor.
   In addition to the metadata that resides directly in the data structure, there is a
vast, swirling universe of ancillary data describing the map, explaining how to use
it, and facilitating community discussion and debate. These data are quite diverse,

consisting of computer programs, tiling schemes, IRC chat rooms, YouTube video
demonstrations, tweets, e-mail discussion groups, and wiki pages. All of these are
socially mediated, produced by the community, and accessible to any user. They are
not unlike the Maxwell manual described in the hydrography example above—not
formal metadata but associated documents that can amplify the meaning of the

data by describing mapping practices. In the format of traditional metadata, these
linkages are often lost. But in the GeoWeb, there is no extra expense in linking to
them. These ancillary data are much like the cloud of information surrounding
digital objects on Amazon.com. We refer to this as metadata squared due to the
possibility of endless proliferation.

   The community of users makes ﬁnal decisions in OSM, unlike Wikipedia, where
edits are semi-anonymous and controversial topics are supervised by a group of
editors. In OSM, one must have an account to edit the map, making the user not
only identiﬁable but also accountable to the community. Trust is placed in the adage,
common among open-source computer programmers, that “given enough eyeballs,

all bugs are shallow” (Raymond 1999). Questions about the map can be posted on
the wiki help pages. Users vote for their favorite question and badges are awarded
for participation in answering. This gamelike feature serves to build community.
4  Metadata Squared: Enhancing Its Usability for Volunteered Geographic…            57























 Fig. 4.3Port OpenStreetMap changeset 3654854, screenshot from www.openstreetmap.org

   One can search for a particular user in the wiki. This redirects one back to the

user’s page in the map interface. The page for the user “samlarsen1,” who edited
the node discussed above, lists the areas that he has mapped and links to a history of
his edits. One editing session (or changeset) tooklace on January 18,2010(Fig. 4.3 ),
when Larsen mapped a road southwest of Port-au-Prince near Grand Goâve.
This page is undeniably metadata. It gives the geographic location of the nodes the

user has contributed, the editing software used (JOSM), the imagery from which the
mapping was derived (Digital Eye), a list of the nodes, and the roads (ways) that
the nodes contributed to.
   Each of these nodes and ways has its own dynamically generated page with a

graphic designed to facilitate human exploration of the data. For example, on the
main page for changeset 3654854, the user can click on the graphic, bringing him
or her back to the full OSM map so he or she can see the geographic context in
which the nodes and ways ﬁt.
   This close coupling between wiki, map, and user information and the deployment

of different media makes for a rich understanding of the data set. In addition, the user
has the ability to download this changeset or any number of other changesets that
might have been produced by “samlarsen1” or other users. Users can manipulate this
changeset data and its associated metadata in many different ways, by user, by tag, or

by geographic area. Examples of relevant code are given in the wiki. In addition,
programmers who work on OSM have begun to construct various tools to manipulate
user tags to provide interesting ways to visualize OSM data. For example, Tagwatch
aggregates user tags three times a week and provides statistical information on which
tags are being used by the community (http://tagwatch.stoecker.eu/).

   A tag is a key=value pair that can be attached to the nodes, ways, relations and
even changesets (http://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Tag)s. Tags serve a role similar
 58                                                            B.S. Poore and E.B. Wolf


 to attributes in a more traditional, relational database model except that they are not
 constrained by a top-down schema. The content of tags is up to the user. Any tag can
 be used, as long as it is veriﬁable, although this is not strictly enforced. If a user
 cannot ﬁnd a relevant tag, he or she can propose a new tag which is voted on by the

 community. This can lead to confusion, as demonstrated by the tags that emerged
 during the Haiti mapping. Collapsed buildings were identiﬁed in a number of difefnet
 ways, as “earthquake:damage = collapsed_building”, “earthquake:damagel=     apcsoeld”,
 “building=collapsed”, and several misspelled variants. Tags recommended by the
 community for use in future disasters reﬂect the most frequent usage.

    As OSM matures, tag analysis with such programs as Tagwatch could be used to
 generate a user-centered, bottom-up ontology (Shirky    2005b). Work in the library
 community advances the notion that social semantics—relationships between tags
 generated through a social process such as OSM participation—can capture local
 meaning best and can be disambiguated and systematized using controlled vocabu-
 laries (Qin 2008). In the case of geospatial metadata, OSM tags on structures

 could be compared to a controlled database such as the USGS’s Geographic Names
 Information System ( http://geonames.usgs.gov/domestic/index.htm)    l to generate a
 gazetteer that would include semantic relations as well as unofﬁcial names fortsutusc
 that mirrored local customs.




   4.4.7       Evaluation

In terms of the criteria for evaluation—usability, coproduction by community,

 ﬁndability, and the altered relationship between data and metadata—the Oa  Spproach
 to metadata seems to do well at accommodating a community of mappers who are
 not necessarily professionals and allowing for simultaneous, distributed updating.
   The Humanitarian OpenStreetMap Team (HOT) (             http://wiki.openstreetmap.
 org/wiki/Humanitarian_OSM_Team) in the Haitian crisis demonstrated the rapidity

 with which maps could be made of an area that had not been not previously well
 mapped, and these maps were widely used byﬁrst responders (Osborne           2010 ) .
 The simplicity of the underlying data structures and the built-in support for distrib-
 uted communications in OSM provided a platform which could rapidly scale for
 multiple simultaneous edit sessions during crisis events.
    Usability: Fitness for use is one aspect of usability most familiar to professional

 mapping endeavors. However, there are places, such as Haiti, that are poorly
 mapped, if they are mapped at all. Any given map of such a place is useful when
 compared to having no map at all. The OSM data have the added beneﬁt of being
 free from governmental or corporatelicense restrictions. Furthermore,crowdsourced
 maps tend to improve over time. In Europe, OSM data are nearing the positional

 accuracy of data from the national mapping agencies, many of which restrict the use
 of their data (Haklay  2010a). OSM data has also proven useful for commercial
 interests such as MapQuest.
4  Metadata Squared: Enhancing Its Usability for Volunteered Geographic…
                                                                                     59

   But just because these maps can be useful, especially in areas where there are no

maps, does not mean that all aspects of usability for the end user have been carefully
considered. Usability refers to the interactive affordances of the system as a whole.
How easy is it toﬁnd, access, edit, or understand the data? In his analysis of the
completeness of two volunteered data sets—the OSM map of Haiti produced by

the volunteers of the HOT and a map of Haiti produced by volunteers working
within Google Map Maker (GMM)—versus a more ofﬁcial data set produced by the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH), Haklay (       2010b ) found
that the ofﬁcial data set was the most complete. Each data set contained features that

the others lacked; however, the lack of metadata to explain data semantics, which
differ among the maps, would make it difﬁcult for the end user to integrate the three
data sets. Even though the OSM and GMM data were produced by volunteers
aligned with the neogeography community and the MINUST         AH data wereproduced

by professionals, the OSM and Map Maker data were delivered to the user in a
manner similar to traditional GIS products. That is, knowledge of the semantics of
the data was left to the end user to interpret. The MINUSTAH data set contained
operational geographic information such as road conditions that reﬂected its use for

humanitarian workers in the ﬁeld. Inan online discussion that followed thisanalysis,
discussants generally agreed that in situations where there are speciﬁc ﬁrst-responder
needs that are not being met by the metadata that accompanies generic data sets,
some intermediary is needed to translate or adapt the data to these needs. Thus,

metadata can directly impact the usability of the data sets and the tools.
   Some users of the two mapping platforms in Haiti argued for simplicity, claiming
that the proliferation of metadata squared made things more difﬁcult:

   I believe that GMM can be a serious competition to OSM if it is simpler to use, easier to
   learn and thus more inviting to the casual newcomer. With GMM you have one way of map-
   ping a simple item e.g. a bicycle track. Everybody can do it in ten minutes, no questions
   arise. With OSM you have two major tools, a huge load of tags, a wiki, a forum, several
   mailing lists, three different answers to the question, pages of contradictory documentation,
   plenty of old discussions and after working through all this, you realize that the question
   has not been resolved yet. I can see how many people would prefer the simple way offered
   by Google.—“Nop” on January 1, 2010 [OSM-talk] Countering Google’s propaganda.
   (http://lists.openstreetmap.org/pipermail/talk/2010-January/046358.html)

   Findability: In a paradoxical way, the proliferation of explanatory material,
dueling tags, and community discussions that makes OSM useful and usable is

the essence ofﬁndability in the media shift that has taken place in the GeoWeb.
Morville 2 (005) describes the shift from theories of information retrieval, on which
catalog-centered traditional metadata is based, to information browsing or foraging, in

which a number ofdifferent strategies are used and the information seeker does not
proceed by sys tematic logical steps but by pursuing leads as they emerge (Bates
2002). Information seeking relies on context, the frame of reference, environment,
or setting within which information seeking is performed (Courtright 2008 ) . So do

usability and usefulness.
   Community:The environment created by OSM with its links back and forth
between the graphic, the textual, and the interactive differs from the spatial data
60                                                            B.S. Poore and E.B. Wolf


infrastructure notion of neatly contained andformalized data—the catalog, the data
element, and the interface. Context is community and community has a close afﬁnity
with gossip and recommendation culture of the current Internet. For people active
in OSM, being able to help decide what to map may be of equal importance as the

act of mapping. For the neogeographers, being able to shape the direction of the
project and the map itself augurs well for a profound shift in media from the old
geospatial world.




   4.5      Conclusion


It has been suggested by Goodchild ( 200)8and Schuurman and Leszczynski (2006 )
that formal metadata standards need to be rethought to become more user-centric.
They also propose adding new data elements to metadata for nonspatial attributes.
This would afford the user better access the context beyondtechnical andgeometric
elements and convey the tacit information that went into the making of a data set.

Goodchild (200)8would augment current metadata about data geometries andela     ges
to better express data quality in data sets of mixed origins. These are both good
suggestions, but we argue that the practices of neogeographers in the GeoWeb have
shown that the metadata genie may be already out of the bottle.
   The Internet has supported greater and greater interactivity, user collaboration,

and the co-creation of geographic data. Metadata generated both automatically and
by direct user contribution from descriptive and transactional work practicescilsosely
coupled with the geographic data itself in these new GeoWeb systems. This prolif-
eration of metadata, or metadata squared, facilitates ﬁnding, assessing, using, and
making geospatial data.

   What is the balance between centralized formalized metadata and the freewhe   egl
metadata of an open-source community such as OSM? We argue that the neo     raeohers
and the academics are both right. Standard metadata is not simple enough and at the
same time not complex enough to give the context of data creation. These problems
largely result from the media shift we have described. Many people ﬁnd traditional
metadata hard to manage, hard to produce, hard to use, and based on an outmoded

static model of the way the Internet works. In theory, traditional metadata could
be considered superior to the messy pseudo-metadata of OSM in its precise descrip-
tions and consistent terminology; however, the difﬁculty lies in getting people to
conform to the rigorous standards and keeping them updated. Formalized cataloging
systems cannot scale at rates that match the growth of information in the GeoWeb.

   Systems like OSM provide a lower cost of entry for producing and using data.
The metadata is simpliﬁed and object-based, allowing for ﬂexibility and rapid devel-
opment. The ability to freely download both data and metadata supports emergent
use. The proliferating ancillary material, the metadata squared, may be difﬁcult to
navigate at times, but the internal linking and the ability to switch back and forth

rapidly between text and graphic modes make for an environment that can be richly
rewarding for discovering meaning. The map grows and gains validity from the
 4  Metadata Squared: Enhancing Its Usability for Volunteered Geographic…                61


 instantaneous feedback among users. And this growth can occur at exponential rates
 not realized by mapping agencies.
    The OSM community might become more organized over time. Weber( 2004 )

 observes that open-source software projects can become powerful magnets that
 attract standards. As discussed above, there is talk on the OSM lists of developing a
 formal ontology of disaster-related terms. Van Exel and Dias (       2011 ) are exploring

 how analysis of user behavior in OSM can serve as a proxy for trust and authority.
 Spatial data infrastructures could beneﬁt by looking at the close coupling of the map
 and its explanatory context and could develop better systems for encouraging user

 feedback, as the USGS research on volunteered geographic information referred to
 above may show (Wolf et al. 2011; van Oort et al. 2009 ) .
    As one geoblogger put it:

    Traditional concepts like error bounds will fundamentally change because data collection is
    no longer happening on an annual basis, butwill occur persistently frommillions ofglobally
    distributed sensors. Error will be a ﬂuid concept and not a static measure. Metadata needs
    to also change to be a ﬂuid concept. The requirement for dedicated GIS metadata librarians

    with hundreds of metadata elements will not scale. Most importantly I think we need to stop
    thinking of the crowd as volunteers and amateu. e should think ofthem as datacollection
    points. This new reality is going to require innovative concepts around not only leveraging
    the crowd for data, but also using the crowd to ascertain the veracity of data. The crowd
    needs to be leveraged to verify and update metadata. (Gorman11 )

    The suggestion that people should be thought of as “collection points” along with
 Goodchild’s 2(007b   )idea of “citizens as sensors” dehumanizes the relationship

 between people and the places they inhabit. The suggestion that the “crowd” should
 be treated as a ﬁeld of automata dismisses the immense value of possibly capturing the
 individual’s (or localized community’s) unique perspectives on place. The key here is

 to allow interaction and feedback (Grira et al.2010). A system like Tagwatch might
 be leveraged into an ontology based on user tags. Van Exel’s work on trust and author-
 ity might provide the basis for a system of metadata veriﬁcation produced by users.

 The ongoing work on qualitative GIS and metadata (Schuurman2009 ) could lead to
 new avenues for enriching metadata. In short, the research frontier on how user-gen-
 erated data might contribute additional meaning to the GeoWeb starts with metadata.


  AcknowledgmentsThe authors are grateful to Daniel Sui, Michael Goodchild, and Sarah Elwood
 for the invitation to submit this chapter to the volume on volunteered geographic information.
 We thank Peter Schweitzer, Martin van Exel, and two anonymous reviewers for helping us improve
 the structure and concepts of the paper.




     References

 Ball, M. (2010). What can be learned from the volunteer mapping efforts for ?patial Sustain,

    January 31, 2010.ttp://vector1media.com/spatialsustain/what-can-be-learned-from-the-uvnotleer-
    mapping-efforts-for-haiti.htmlAccessed July 28, 2011.
Batcheller, J. (2008). Automating geospatial metadata generation—An integrated data manage-
    ment and documentation approach. Computers & Geosciences, 34 , 387–398. doi:   10.1016/j.
    cageo.2007.04.001 .
    62                                                                     B.S. Poore and E.B. Wolf


    Batcheller, J., Gittings, B., & Dunfey, R. (2009). A method for automating geospatial datasetmat.ta

       Future Internet, 1 , 28–46.
    Bates, M. (2002, September 11). Towardan integrated model ofinformation seeking andsearching.
       Fourth international conference on information needs, seeking, and use in different contexts ,
       Lisbon, Portugal.

    Budhathoki, N. (2010). Participants’ motivations to contribute geographic information in an online
       community. Dissertation, University of Illinois Urbanna-Champaign.
    Budhathoki, N., Bruce, B., & Nedovic-Budic, Z. (2008). Reconceptualizing the role of the users of
       spatial data infrastructure. GeoJournal, 72(3–4), 149–160. doi: 10.1007/s10708-008-9189-x.

    Chrisman, N. (1994). Metadata required to determine the ﬁtness of spatial data for use in environ-
       mental analysis. In W. Michener, J. Brunt, & S. Stafford (Eds.),   Environmental information
       management and analysis: Ecosystem to global scales (pp. 177–190). London: Taylor and
       Francis.

   Coleman, D. J., Georgiadou, Y., & Labonte, J. (2009). Volunteered geographic information: The
       nature and motivation of produsers. International Journal of Spatial Data Infrastructures, 4 ,
       332–358.
   Comber, A., Fisher, P., & Wadsworth, R. (2008). Semantics, metadata, geographical information

       and users. Transactions in GIS, 12, 287–291. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9671.2008.01102.x.
   Courtright, C. (2008). Context in information behavior research. In B. Cronin (Ed.),       Annual
       review of information science and technology        (pp. 273–306). Medford: Information
       Today, Inc.

    Davies, C., Wood, L., & Fountain, L. (2005, Nov 8–10). User-centred GI: Hearing the voice of the
       customer. Annual Conference of the Association for Geographic Information: AGI 05: People
       Places and Partnerships , London.
    Entchev, A. (2010). Comment to “Let’s save metadata”, February 16, 2010.     http://www.spatially-

       adjusted.com/2010/02/15/lets-save-metadata/#comment-13108      . Accessed July 27, 2011.
   Federal Geographic Data Committee. (1994). Content standards for digital geospatial metadata .
       Washington, DC: Federal Geographic Data Committee.
   Federal Geographic Data Committee. (2000).      Content standard for digital geospatial metadata

       workbook, Version 2.0. Reston: Federal Geographic Data Committee.
   Federal Geographic Data Committee. (2006). Clearinghouse concepts q&a. Federal Geographic
       Data Committee.        http://www.fgdc.gov/dataandservices/clearinghouse_qanda.       Accessed
       November 10, 2010.

  Fee, J. (2010). Let’s save metadata.       http://www.spatiallyadjusted.com/2010/02/15/lets-save-
       metadata/ . Accessed November 12, 2010.
    Gahegan, M., Luo, J., Weaver, S. D., Pike, W., & Banchuen, T. (2009). Connecting GEON: Making
       sense of the myriad resources, researchers and concepts that comprise a geoscience infrasttruurce.

       Computers & Geosciences, 35 , 836–854.
    Goodchild, M. (2007a). Beyond metadata: Towards user-centric description of data quality. Spatial
       Data Quality 2007: ISSDQ. 13–15 June at Enschede, the Netherlands.
   Goodchild, M. (2007b). Citizens as sensors: The world of volunteered geography.       GeoJournal,

       69 (4), 211–221.
    Goodchild, M. (2008, June 25–27). Spatial accuracy 2.0. In8th international symposiumon spatial
       accuracy assessment in natural resources and environmental sciences , Shanghai.
   Goodchild, M., Fu, P., & Rich, P. (2007). Sharing geographic information: An assessment of the

       geospatial One-stop. Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 97 (2), 250–266.
   Gorman, S. (2011). Statistical challenges of data at scale: Bringing back the science.  http://blog.
       geoiq.com/2011/06/20/statistical-challenges-of-data-at-scale-bringing-back-the-science/       .
       Accessed July 27, 2011.

      Gould, M. (2006a). Meta- ﬁ ndability: PaG  rteo.onnexion International Magazine, 5 (7), 36–38.
      Gould, M. (2006b). Meta- ﬁ ndability: PG  art 2.onnexion International Magazine, 5(8), 28–29.
   Grira, J., Bédard, Y., & Roche, S. (2010). Spatial data uncertainty in the VGI world: Going from
       consumer to producer. Geomatica, 64 (1), 61–71.
Haddad, T. C. (2010). Comment to let’s save metadata.                   http://www.spatiallyadjusted.

       com/2010/02/15/lets-save-metadata/#comment-13113      . Accessed July 20, 2011.
  4   Metadata Squared: Enhancing Its Usability for Volunteered Geographic…                     63


 Haklay, M. (2010a). How good is volunteered geographical information? A comparative study of

     OpenStreetMap and Ordnance Survey datasets.Environment and Planning B, 37(4), 682–703.
 Haklay, M. (2010b). Haiti—Further comparisons and the usability of geographic information in
     emergency situations.  http://povesham.w ordpress.com/2010/01/29/haiti-–-further-comparsions-
     and-the-usability-of-geographic-information-in-emergency-situations/. Accessed July 11, 2011.

  Hennig, S., Belgiu, G., Wallentin, K., & Hormanseder, K. (2011). User-centric SDI: Addressing
     users in a third-generation SDI. In Inspire Conference 2011 , Edinburgh.
  International Organization for Standardization. (1986). ISO 8879:1986 Information processing –
     Text and oﬁfce systems – Standard Generalized Markup Language (SGML)                . Geneva:

     International Organization for Standardization.
 International Organization for Standardization. (2003).  ISO 19115: 2003, Geographic informa-
     tion–metadata. Geneva: International Organization for Standardization.
    Korzybski, A. (1933  A).non-Aristotelian system and its necessity for rigour in mathematics and

     physics. Science and sanity. Laxeville: International Non-Aristotelian Library.
    Latour, B. (1999P)a.ndora’s hope: Essays on the reality of science studies . Cambridge, MA:
     Harvard University Press.
  Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991).Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge:

     Cambridge University Press.
  Li, W., Yang, C., & Yang, C. (2010). An active crawler for discovering geospatial web services and
     their distribution pattern – A case study of OGC web map service.    International Journal of
     Geographical Information Science, 24(8), 1127–1147. doi:   10.1080/13658810903514172.

  Maron, M. (2010). Haiti OpenStreetMap response.     http://brainoff.com/weblog/2010/01/14/1518.
     Accessed November 11, 2010.
  Maxwell, J., Edwards, C., Jensen, M., Paustian, S., Parrott, H., & Hill, D. (1995). A hierarchical
     framework of aquatic ecological units in North American (Nearctic Zone)      . St. Paul: U.S.

     Department of Agriculture, Forest Service.
    McLuhan, M. (1964   U).derstanding media: The extension of man. London: Sphere Books.
  Millerand, F., & Bowker, G. (2009). Metadata standards: Trajectories and enactment in the life of
     an ontology. In M. Lampland & S. Star (Eds.),     Standards and their stories (pp. 149–166).

     Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
  Moore, M. (2010). Cyborg metadata: Humans and machines working together to manage informa-
     tion – Part 1: Text. Online Currents, 24 (3), 131–138.
    Morville, P. (2005A). bient ﬁ ndabilit.ySebastopol: O’Reilly.

    National Research Council. (200N   1)a.tional spatial data infrastructure partnership programs:
     Rethinking the focus. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
  Nielsen, J., & Loranger, H. (2006). Prioritizing web usability. Berkeley: New Riders Press.
    Onsrud, H. (Ed.). (200R 7).search and theory in advancing spatial data infrastructure concepts .

     Redlands: ESRI Press.
  O’Reilly, T. (2005). What is web 2.0?: Design patterns and business models for the next generation
     of software. http://www.oreillynet.com/lpt/a/6228. Accessed November 15, 2010.
  Osborne, C. (2010). Mapping a crisis.Guardian Online   http://www.guardian.co.uk/open-platform/

     blog/mapping-a-crisis . Accessed July 27, 2011.
  Poore, B. (2003). Blue lines: Water, information, and salmon in the Paciﬁc Northwest. Dissertation,
     University of Washington.
  Poore, B., & Chrisman, N. (2006). Order from noise: Toward a social theory of geographic infor-

     mation. Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 96 (3), 508–523.
  Pultar, E., Cova, M., Yuan, M., & Goodchild, M. (2010). EDGIS: A dynamic GIS based on space
     time points. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 24      (3), 329–346.
     doi: 10.1080/13658810802644567.

Qin, J. (2008). Controlled semantics vs. social semantics: An epistemological analysis. In
     Proceedings of the Tenth International ISKO Conference: Culture and identity in knowledge
     organization (pp. 5–8), Montreal, August 5–8, 2008.
    Raymond, E. (1999  T)h.e Cathedral and the Bazaar. Sebastopol: O’Reilly.
 Rodriguez, M., Cruz, I., Egenhofer, M., & Levashkin, S. (Eds.). (2005).    GeoSpatial semantics.

     Lecture notes in computer science (Vol. 3799). Berlin: Springer.
  64                                                                     B.S. Poore and E.B. Wolf


  Scharl, A., & Tochterman, K. (2007). The geospatial web. London: Springer.

 Schuurman, N. (2008). Database ethnographies using social science methodologies to enhance
     data analysis and interpretation. Geography Compass, 2 (5), 1529–1548.
  Schuurman, N. (2009). Metadata as a site for imbuing GIS with qualitative information. In M. Cope
     & S. Elwood (Eds.),Qualitative GIS: A mixed media approach(pp. 41–56). Los Angeles: Sage.

  Schuurman, N., & Leszczynski, A. (2006). Ontology based metadata. Transactions in GIS, 10 (5),
     709–726.
  Schweitzer, P. (1998). Easy as ABC – Putting metadata in plain languageG. IS World, 11(9), 56–59.
  Shirky, C. (2005a). Ontology is overrated: Categories, links, and tags.tp://www.shirky.com/writ-

     ings/ontology_overrated.html  . Accessed January 28, 2009.
Shirky, C. (2005b). Folksonomies+controlled vocabularies.        http://many.corante.com/archives/
     2005/01/07/folksonomies_controlled_vocabularies.php    . Accessed October 28, 2010.
  Silver, J. (2010). Data information: How visual tools can transform lives./www.wired.co.uk/wired-

     magazine/archive/2010/09/features/data-information?page=all Accessed November 11, 2010.
  Six Rivers National Forest. (1999). Metadata for stream. Eureka, CA: U.S. Forest Service.  http://
     www.ncgic.gov/GIS_Data/smf/hydro/stream.metadata.html      . Accessed September 10, 2001.
  Sui, D. (2008). The wikiﬁcation of GIS and its consequences: Or Angelina Jolie’s new tattoo and

     the future of GIS. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 32 , 1–5.
  Sui, D., & Goodchild, M. (2001). GIS as mediaI?nternational Journal of Geographical Information
     Science, 15(5), 387–390. doi: 10.1080/13658810110038924.
Sui, D., & Goodchild, M. (2011). The convergence of GIS and social media: Challenges for

     GIScience. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 25 (11), 1737–1748.
  Tsou, M. (2002). An operational metadata framework for searching, indexing, and retrieving geo-
     graphic information services on the Internet. In M. Egenhofer & D. Mark (Eds.),    GIScience
     2002: Lecture notes in computer science (Vol. 2478, pp. 313–332). Berlin: Springer.

    Turner, A. (2006In).troduction to neogeography. Sebastopol: O’Reilly Media.
 U.S. Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. (1999). 50
     CFR Part 223: Endangered and threatened species; proposed rule governing take of threatened
     Snake River, Central California Coast, South/Central California Coast, Lower Columbia River,

     Central Valley California, Middle Columbia River, and Upper Willamette River evolutionarily
     signiﬁcant units (ESUs) of West Coast steelhead. Federal Register, 64 (250), 73479–73506.
 U.S. Department of Commerce, U.S. Forest Service, Remote Sensing Lab, Paciﬁc Southwest
     Region. (2004). Metadata for NWCSTRM03_2 2004.         http://www.fs.fed.us/r5/rsl/projects/gis/

     data/calcovs/nwcstrm03_2.html   . Accessed July 27, 2011.
  Van Exel, M., & Dias, E. (2011). Towards a methodology for trust stratiﬁcation in VGI. VGI Pre-
     Conference at AAG , Seattle.    http://vgi.spatial.ucsb.edu/sites/vgi.spatial.ucsb.edu/ ﬁ les/ ﬁ le/aag/
     van_Exel_abstract.pdf . Accessed July 8, 2010.

 van Oort, P., Hazeu, G., Kramer, H., Bregt, A., & Rip, F. (2009). Social networks in spatial data
     infrastructures. GeoJournal, 75 (1), 105–118.
  Vander Wal, T. (2007). Folksonomy: Coinage and deﬁnition.  http://www.vanderwal.net/folksonomy.
     htm . Accessed November 15, 2010.

 Waters, T. (2010). The OpenStreetMap project and Haiti earthquake case study.    http://www.slide-
     share.net/chippy/openstreetmap-case-study-haiti-crisis-response Accessed November 10, 2010.
    Weber, S. (2004 T)h.e Success of open source. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
    Weinberger, D. (200 E7v)e.rything is miscellaneous: The power of the new digital di.Nrew York:

     Times Books.
   Wikipedia.    (2010).   OpenStreetMap.  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OpenStreetMap.    Accessed
     November 15, 2010.
  Wolf, E., Matthews, G., McNinch, K., & Poore, B. (2011).OpenStreetMap collaborativeprototype,

     phase one (Open-ﬁle report of 2011–1136). Reston: U.S. Geological Survey.     http://pubs.usgs.
     gov/of/2011/1136/  . Accessed December 12, 2011.
  Wood, D., Fels, J., & Krygier, J. (2010). Rethinking the power of maps . New York: Guilford.
   Chapter 5

 Situating the Adoption of VGI by Government



   Peter A. Johnson          and    Renee E. Sieber










 AbstracGt overnments have long been active online, providing services and
information to citizens. With the development of Web 2.0 technology, many govern-

ments are considering how they can better engage with and accept citizen input
online, particularly through the gathering and use of volunteered geographic infor-
mation (VGI). Though there are several beneﬁts to governments accepting VGI, the
process of adopting VGI as a support to decision-making is not without challenge.

We identify three areas of challenge to the adoption of VGI by government; these
are the costs of VGI, the challenges for governments to accept non-expert data of
questionable accuracy and formality, and the jurisdictional issues in VGI. We then
identify three ways that governments can situate themselves to accept VGI—by
formalizing the VGI collection process, through encouraging collaboration between

levels of government, and by investigating the participatory potential of VGI.



   5.1     Introduction


Western-style democratic governments at all levels are often interested in connecting
with citizens through the use of Internet-based communications technologies, such
as Web 2.0. Creating this new online relationship between governments and citizens
can support greater transparency, efﬁciency,effectiveness of government services

(Brewer2006 ; Dovey and Eggers2008; Saebo et al.2008). This also can increase the
level of citizen participation in decision-g.umerous technologies haveemerged


  P. A. Joh*so)n (
Department of Geography and Environmental Management, University of Waterloo,
 Waterloo , ON , Canada
e-mail: pa2johns@uwaterloo.ca

  R. E. Sieber
  Department of Geography, McGill University, Montreal , QC , Canada
e-mail: renee.sieber@mcgill.ca

D. Sui et al. (eds.), Crowdsourcing Geographic Knowledge: Volunteered Geographic
Information (VGI) in Theory and Practice, DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-4587-2_5,
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
66                                                         P.A. Johnson and R.E. Sieber


to support these types of e-governance initiatives; these platforms can be used to
address place-based aspects where governments impact everyday life (Drummond and
French 2008). Applications range from easing the daily commute through accessing

crowdsourced trafﬁc reports to facilitating discussion on land use development
scenarios and to identifying service provision locations. The Geospatial Web 2.0
(or Geoweb) is a set of geospatially enabled online tools and data that can be used to
support these types of initiatives (Ganapati 2010; Rouse et al. 2007 ) . The Geoweb
serves as a conduit for volunteered geographic information (VGI) sourced from or

contributed by citizens as part of a one-way ‘government-to-citizen’ (G2C) or two-
way ‘citizen-to-government-to-citizen’ (C2G2C) process. By requesting citizen
contributions of VGI, a government can potentially create a two-way conversation
with citizens that demonstrates their responsiveness to speciﬁc concerns.
   Two reasons drive the collection and use ofVGI by governmentsand government

agencies. First is the potential for citizens, whether they reside inside or outside a
given jurisdiction, to act as sensors of their environment (Goodchild    2007 ) . The
general trend in downsizing governments at the provincial/state level, driven by
neoliberalization, has reduced the resources available to support municipal level
decision-making (Dovey and Eggers 2008; Johnson and Sieber 2011a ) . In North

America and Europe, municipalities are being asked to take on increased planning
and land management responsibilities but without a corresponding increase in
resources or staff support. This creates an opportunity, for better or worse, for the
use VGI as a type of ‘contracting out’ of data collection tasks (Newman et al2. 010 ) ,
creating a government spatial data infrastructure that is dependent on volunteer

effort. This approach to VGI use by governments treats citizens as a distributed set
of sensors (Goodchild 2007)to be networked together to supply decision-makers
with rich sources of data. Citizens, speciﬁcally local residents, are supposedly closer
to the phenomena, can identify changes, and report those changes more quickly than

government employees reliant on infrequently collected data. Citizens as reference
is ambiguous hold a valuable local knowledge of place, and considering that pride
of place is a prime motivator of citizens who contribute geospatial information, they
are more likely to volunteer that information in digital form (Budhathoki et al.010 ;
Elwood2008 ) . Tulloch   20(8) provides a case study of the citizen-based veriﬁcation

of ofﬁcial government-collected data on vernal pools. This task was conducted by a
group of citizen scientists, contributing information via a custom-made Geoweb
site. This example shows how citizen volunteer efforts can be incorporated into a
government process as a way of both saving the government money and utilizing the
knowledge of citizens to support decision-making and management.

   Second, VGI can be valuable to governments as a form of citizen participation.
As opposed to the citizens-as-sensors view, this treats the process of VGI usage as
an opportunity for citizens-as-partners to co-produce social, economic, and environ-
mental goals, with the mission of strengthening civil society. For governments, an
increased focus on the process of VGI collection and two-way communication,

rather than the unidirectional sensor relationship, can support essential participatory
components of democratic governance, particularly in reinforcing the transparency
and responsiveness of a government to its electorate (D     ovey and Eggers    2008 ;
5  Situating the Adoption of VGI by Government                                     67


Ganapati2011). Similar to how town hall assemblies or letter writing to representatives
is a method of sharing citizen perspective with elected ofﬁcials, VGI holds promise
to act as a digital and geospatially referenced conduit to connect elector with both

elected ofﬁcial and speciﬁc government departments. This strengthening of C2G2C
linkages includes the potential for constituents to form a power base for government
employee initiatives or support for ofﬁcial policies.
   Despite the identiﬁcation of reasons why governments would adopt VGI and the
Geoweb (Ganapati    2011; Johnson and Sieber2011a), these motivations alone do not

determine whether a government will proactively solicit information or integrate
content into policy. Shifting government motivations to participate in concrete
actions relies on explicating the organizational and cultural challenges, technological
issues, and issues involving the scaled and interconnected nature of governance. As
governments adopt different formal and informal processes and tools for gathering,

evaluating, and incorporating this type of data into decision-making, critical
reﬂection on the relationship between VGI as a form of citizen participation and the
needs and constraints of government is required.
   Past research emphasizes the opportunity for VGI and the Geoweb to realize the
promise of public participation geographic information systems (PPGIS) (Miller

2007; Sieber 2006), providing a conduit for citizens to share their local knowledge
with decision-makers, effecting change, establishing two-way communication, or
even circumventing traditional pathways of public participation. To overcome these
challenges, VGI researchers can draw on critical GIS studies (Crampton         2009 ;
Schuurman 2000; Sieber2004, 2006). For example, we are warned of the continued

slippage of privacy in a Web 2.0 world (Elwood and Leszczynski 2011; Zook and
Graham 2007), and how citizen participation in online deliberation may not match
the high levels of participation that are often seen in other online activities, such
as social networking and gaming (Chadwick         2009). Echoing critiques of GIS

(e.g. Pickles 1995), government adoption of VGI could represent a strategy by
government of co-optation or distraction from other more effective forms of citizen
engagement. These concerns highlight the need for a better understanding of how
VGI and government can integrate and what factors, both of VGI and governments
as organizations, affect this adoption. This research differs from the majority of the

research around government adoption of VGI, which emphasizes data handling
(e.g. evaluating accuracy, understanding citizen motivations to contribute as a
mechanism to perpetuate information ﬂows) largely to the exclusion of the dem   cratic
process by which governments must act—hence, our use in the chapter title of the
word, ‘situating’, which expresses a social and critical practice.

   This chapter draws on our experience developing and implementing VGI appli-
cations for government partners in the Canadian province of Quebec. The context
of our reﬂections makes these recommendations particularly relevant to other
similar western-style democracies, particularly the United Kingdom, Australia and
New Zealand, Western Europe, and the United States. Though there are likely to be

differences in VGI adoption in government between municipal and state/provincial
governments within one country, or between countries with different political
traditions, there are comparative lessons to be drawn from this work that can guide
68                                                         P.A. Johnson and R.E. Sieber


VGI adoption across multiple contexts. We have been co-developing Geoweb and
VGI collection platforms in the rural area of Acton, a municipal regional area,
similar to a county but with greater jurisdictional authority (Municipal Regional
County of Acton or MRC Acton), approximately 1 h east of Montreal, Quebec.

The development is being coordinated by ﬁve provincial agencies; the hope is that
this will form the basis for further Geoweb developments throughout the province.
The speciﬁc goals of this project areto engage citizens withincommunity economic
development and environmental management using Geoweb applications and
to co-develop a sustainable software platform for sharing with other jurisdictions.

We implemented projects to create user-generated maps of local economic assets
to support regional marketing efforts and to gather citizen reports of riverbank
erosion as a component of municipal remediation efforts. Through these two
projects in particular, we have been engaged with governments attempting to adopt
VGI collection and their associated reactions to the challenges that this adoption
creates. These adoption challenges and organizational constraints are the focus of

this chapter.
   The government agencies with which we work have been initially enthusiastic
about the potential of VGI, but this dampens closer to deployment, as they raise
questions about the ﬁtness of VGI within government. Across many different types
of government, we have repeatedly seen a resistance to the acceptance and use of

VGI. Based on these experiences, we have identiﬁed a series of broad constraints to
the adoption of VGI by governments.These constraints include boththe motivational
factors that lead government to consider the use of VGI and how these play out on
the landscape of organizational structure to impede adoption and use. This means
examining government adoption through tw    o models of citizenry:citizens as sensors

and citizens as partners. We frame a discussion of ways that governments can situate
themselves amongst the constraints so they can adopt VGI.



   5.2      The Practice of VGI in Government


The concept of users contributing geographically related information online as
participation in governance is not new. In an overview of the use of geographic
information systems (GIS) to increase citizen engagement, Ganapati2    (010 ) outlines
four broad thematic areas where governments can use the Geoweb for e-government

applications: citizen-oriented transit information, citizen relationship management,
citizen-volunteered geographic information, and citizen participation in planning
and decision-making. Each of these application areas builds on identiﬁed roles for
information and communications technology (ICT) for e-governance and PPGIS
research, providing services to citizens and increasing participation in governance,

in many cases through the government acceptance of VGI. Theﬁrst two of these
areas are based on data provision from government to citizens as a form of improved
service. Whether this in the form of real-time transit tracking, or by making goveent
data more freely available, these types of initiatives show how governments can
5   Situating the Adoption of VGI by Government                                  69


improve services and become more transparent, though these types of information
provision activities do not equate with public participation or involvement.
   Many examples of e-government activities focus on the prosaic functioning of
governance-service provision and strategic planning issues. The most prominent usage

of VGI has been in acute responses to a natural or human-generated crisis. Many of
these occurred exogenously to government, in a sense responding to the failures of
governments to act swiftly to identify hotspots and distribute aid. The earliest example
is the use of Google Maps to encourage volunteers to contribute information about
Hurricane Katrina impacts in 2005 (Miller2007). This information was used to support

ofﬁcial government rescue efforts. Similar uses of VGI have been seen in responses to
wildﬁres (De Longueville et al.2010; Goodchild and Glennon2010 ) and earthquakes
(Zook et al.2010). Given that each of these examples was developed externally to gov-
ernment organizations, yet has as an outcome the mobilization of decision-making and
demand for government action, it raises questions about the ability and desire for gov-
ernments to directly accept and act upon VGI. The utility of VGI for many decision-

making tasks has been identiﬁed, but the process through which VGI can be adopted by
government remains to be negotiated.



   5.3      Adoption of VGI in Government


In addition to learning from existing e-government examples, governments will
likely look to their experiences with GIS when they decide to adopt VGI. Although
both are geospatial and rooted to place, adoption of the Geoweb, that is, the uirly

platform upon which VGI is added, differsfrom GIS implementation ingovernment.
One signiﬁcant area of difference is ithe locus of development. GISimplementation
steps, such as the customization of the software, acquisition of framework data sets,
and the purchase of hardware, are conducted under a mandate of a government
agency or department. Even if GIS forms a part of a multi-agency activity,movnetrsn—

here, we refer largely to municipalities or regional agencies—have considerable
control over purchases, staff, and data. By contrast, many Geoweb platforms operate
outside of existing government mandates and processes. The hardware and software
stack are now hosted in the Web-based ‘cloud’ and often reliant on a software-
as-a-service (SaaS) model of distribution. VGI generation is external to the oriona
compared to the internal data of the organization typically fed into a GIS. This allows

citizens to circumvent government, making the VGI adoption process different than
that of other types of technologies within government, such as GIS (Budic    1994 ;
Goelman2005), planning support systems (PSS), and spatial decision support sty es s
(SDSS) (Geertman 2006; Vonk et al. 2007 ) . GIS, PSS, and SDSS adoption within
an organization often starts with software being purchased or developed to accplish

a set series of tasks (Nedovic-Budic 1998 ) .
   Technology adoption research has focused on the bridging of a perceived gap
between technology developer, tool, and use,rwhere addressing identﬁi edconstraints
is within the sphere of inﬂuence of either developer or organization (Johnson and
70                                                       P.A. Johnson and R.E. Sieber


Sieber2011b; te Brömmelstroet and Bertolini2008; te Brömmelstroet and Schrijnen
2010). VGI demonstrates the need to negotiate adoption in a more ﬂuid fashion, one
that is not simply focused on a developer meeting the needs of the user. In aoaece
context, these roles are shared by citizens, community organizations, non-gomerntal

organizations (NGOs), universities, information technology (IT) companies, and
multiple levels of government. For example, the citizen can ﬁll roles as the devel-
oper of technology, VGI contributor, and the user of contributed data sets. Citizens
can build their own mash-ups and develop their own mobile apps. Citizens produce
(the subject of VGI), they consume (traditional GIS), and they create value-added,

derived information as well. An IT company may develop tools but is also the user,
accessing citizen VGI for marketing purposes. Governments now develop Geoweb
applications to gather VGI for speciﬁc purposes, using third-party platforms such as
Twitter and Google Maps, though they have little control, ownership, or input into
these platforms. With these competing priorities, Geoweb applications have multiple
objectives, which may be only peripherally related to those of government. From a

developer perspective, the tools to collect VGI are not simply reﬁned, retracted, or
revised to better meet the needs of government; instead, they evolve in response
to corporate and user-community preferences. Government adoption of VGI
and its underlying Geoweb platform operates through a more interconnected and
complicated set of pathways compared to traditional types of geospatial technology,

where software is provided by one developer and data is shared internally or sourced
from other government agencies (Harvey 2003; Onsrud and Pinto 1991 ) .
   We deﬁne broad characteristics of VGI that challenge the technology adoption
processes in government, generate new organizational constraints, or reinforce
existing constraints that can impede adoption. These are the costs of VGI, thchals

for governments to accept non-expert data of questionable accuracy and formality,
and the jurisdictional issues in VGI.



   5.3.1      The Costs of VGI


Any new technology will introduce additional resource costs for government. For
VGI, these costs can be both ﬁnancial, for software and services, and human resource
costs, for training to negotiate the VGI learning curve and additional staff to support
the VGI gathering process. Each of these areas of resource cost will differ depending

on the type of government organization. In general, for government agencies with
larger budgets or an existing GIS division, there is likely greater capacity to absorb
the costs of gathering and using VGI. These agencies have existing spatial data that
can be combined or reﬁned with VGI. They likely have staff trained in system
administration, computer server maintenance, and ability to build computer applica-

tions. Geoweb platform development requires a shift in domain knowledge that
more resembles this type of system administration as opposed to spatial analysis.
For local and regional governments, there still may be many good reasons to use
VGI, yet the infrastructure required to support its gathering may not exist or be
5  Situating the Adoption of VGI by Government                                     71


otherwise inadequate. This is a similar dynamic as ifsound with manytypes ofIT and
GIS adoption in municipal planning organizations, where availability ofﬁnancial
and human resources represents a signiﬁcant contributor to adoption (Al-Kodmany

2000; Carver et al. 2001 ) .
   The resource implications of the Geoweb framework used to collect VGI are
generally ignored in academic literature, with the prevailing view being that these
tools are easy to deploy and lightweight (Haklay et al. 2008; Hudson-Smith et al.
2009; Turner 2006). Though the ﬁnancial cost of access to many platforms, such as

Google Maps ( http://code.google.com/apis/maps/index.htm)land Open Layers
( http://openlayers.org/) may be low or free, the skills cost to develop anything more
than a basic solution can be prohibitive, requiring advanced computer programming
skills. Add to this the cost of maintaining and eventual refreshing of a site, and there
may be a substantial resource cost for governments. Even governments that are

active on free social media sites, such as Twitter and Facebook, may ﬁnd that they
require additional training and resource expenditure tgather, respondto, andanalyze
contributed information. The human resources cost of VGI is also based on the
modiﬁcation of existing workﬂow and organizational process to accept this new
form of input. Depending on the speciﬁc government process into which VGI is to

be incorporated, this could require a chain of employees to adapt their workﬂow.
For example, with a government service municipal request system, citizens submit
a request for service to repair issues such as broken street lights or potholes. Without a
robust integration into a municipal workﬂow including dispatchers, workers, and
a response to citizens once work is completed, such a system may add considerably

to workload.
   In MRC Acton, the costs of VGI have been encountered in several ways. First,
resource costs have largely focused on human  resources, as staff gotiate thelearning
curve for understanding and using VGI. Despite the presence and frequent use of

traditional desktop GIS in MRC Acton, we found that this did not adequately
prepare staff for gathering or using VGI, underlining the distinct difference in
adoption between these two technologies. As discussed earlier, the spatial analysis
skills used in GIS are not directly transferrable to the systems administration and
Web development skills used in gathering and using VGI. Considering this, for the

introduction of VGI within government, it must be noted that skills and experience
using GIS are not directly transferrable.
   Second, though VGI is often promoted in terms of resource beneﬁts and cost
savings, in our partnership with MRC Acton, we discovered that there are opportu-
nity costs as well. We have postulated that VGI could reduce the political distance

between the state and citizens, but it could also simultaneously increase the politi-
cal distance. We are working with a community-based organization to provide a
Geoweb platform to support the identiﬁcation and management of riverbank ero-
sion. Farmers and land owners would report erosion as a ﬁrst step to government
action mitigating that erosion. However, the reporting of erosion itself was revealed

to possibly identify farmer malfeasance in their land management practices, which
may lead to increased costs for the farmer who reported the erosion. In this way,
erosion monitoring becomes a delicate negotiation of protecting identiﬁcation of
72                                                         P.A. Johnson and R.E. Sieber


the farmer as well as revealing location-based information. There are numerous
informal practices that occur face-to-face that would be impeded in this digital
broadcast of problems.



   5.3.2      The Challenge for Governments of Accepting

         Non-expert Data


As a data type contributed by a variety of individuals, VGI fundamentally differs
from traditional forms of data collected by experts that is often used in government
GIS (Budhathoki et al. 2008 ) . Goodchild  200(7) highlights this difference between
data that is voluntarily asserterst-hand, by an individual without formal
qualiﬁcations in that domain, and data that is authoritative, or collected within a
formalized framework, often at a distance, by an expert in the subject, as part of

their paid work. The latter is the realm of GIS, where it is unquestioned that data is
generated by experts in theirﬁeld; the data can still have errors but at least the
source is unquestioned. Governments face a formidable challenge in accepting VGI
when they shift from the use of only expert data to a mixed model that can evaluate
and incorporate citizen volunteered data. This shift requires that governments

engage with several aspects of the VGI creation process, including the individual
contributors of VGI, a step towardswidespread participation that manyin government
may not be ready to take.
   One of the most signiﬁcant shifts between traditional forms of expert-collected
data and VGI is the individual who is doing the data collection. Rather than a team

of trained experts that collect data using specialist tools such as remote sensing, or
formalized methodologies, such as a government census, VGI is largely contributed
by individuals as a leisure or non-paid work activity (Goodchild    2007 ; Newman
et al. 2010; Tulloch 2008). Citizens instead are considered holders of valuable local
knowledge (Elwood and Ghose2004). Despite evidence that non-experts can indeed

contribute information (Budhathoki et al. 2010; Haklay 2010; Parsons et al. 2011 ) ,
the characterization of VGI as an informal data source, one created by non-experts
or ‘neogeographers’ as a hobby (Hudson-Smith et al.      2009; Turner 2006 ) , may
in fact prevent governments from considering VGI as a serious source of data.
This terminology and phrasing can often be saddled with negative connotations
when compared to authoritative and expert data provided by government agencies

(Harvey 2007). To better integrate VGI into government and decision-making, the
continued use of these terms may serve to marginalizeVGI as a datatype, regardless
of its ﬁtness relative to authoritative sources.
   The perception of VGI as varying signiﬁcantly in quality compared to authoritative
sources is a constraint on government adoption. This aspect of constraint is based on

the legal implications of government error—essentially, who will get blamed if data
are wrong. Compared to authoritative data, two assessments of Open Street Map, one
of the largest VGI collection platforms, have found variable levels of congruence with
authoritative data sets, ranging from poor to excellent, with populated areas often
5  Situating the Adoption of VGI by Government                                      73


displaying improved coverage (Girres and Touya2010; Haklay2010 ) . The challenge
to the use of VGI is that it could be considered unscientiﬁc due to data quality issues
surrounding its collection. For example, information about sitings of endangered

species could then be ignored in areas proposed for logging. Without a ﬁrm view of
the quality of VGI, it can be difﬁcult for a government to know how much weight
should be given to citizen opinions or comments.
   A deﬁning characteristic of VGI is that it is often contributed within multiple
informal, casual, and unstructured contexts (Elwood 2009; Flanagin and Metzge2  r008 ) .

The data may or may not be sufﬁciently complete, that is, seamless over a spatial
extent. Because of this informality, the quality of VGI can vary considerably. For
example, unstructured or qualitative data, such as Twitter postings or freeform text in
online review sites, can be rich sources of information but simultaneously difﬁcult to
incorporate into a decision-making process (Johnson et al.2012 ) . Concerns over the

quality and accuracy of VGI serve as a signiﬁcant disincentive for governments (Haklay
2010; Seeger 2008). VGI has potential to support governance because the data can
help correct errors, reﬁne the data through precision, and ﬁll in gaps where there are no
government employees. However, governments at all levels are reminded of their
legislated obligations for due diligence in planning. Whether or not VGI is considered

an acceptable data source for decision-making, support can depend on the credibility
of the source, the presence of a mass volume of like contributions, and favourable
comparison to other traditional data types (Flanagin and Metzg2  e008; Haklay2010 ) .
   Governments face challenges in utilizing non-expert data. Establishing the
credibility of a source may demand that government knows who exactly is provid-

ing the data, to ensure it reﬂects the constituency in question and not the result of
outside agendas. Due to the largely anonymous nature of many online activities,
governments may never be able to fully verify even the general characteristics of
those who contribute VGI (Budhathoki et a2   l.010 ) . Can governments be con ﬁth  daetnt

VGI is the product of individuals with ﬁrst-hand knowledge of agiven phenomenon?
Or is data contribution driven by a speciﬁc agenda? This becomes particularly
salient if VGI is collected to assess public perceptions. VGI can be considered a
convenience sample of one particular subset of the population, rather than representa-
tive of the whole. This contrasts markedly to ofﬁcial data sets gathered with random

samples of the population that can therefore support rigorous statistical analysis. These
concerns can be partially addressed through creating a VGI collection framework
with a strong emphasis on      identifying individual contributors (Seeger     2008 ) .
Techniques used to verify identity include logins, mail-outs with access codes, and
IP logging to ensure participants are from within a certain geographic area. Each of

these techniques does come with a risk of alienating or otherwise reducing partici-
pation, either because participants want to be anonymous or have difﬁculty navigat-
ing extra layers of technology (Brewer   2006; Vonk et al. 2005 ) .
    Tulloch 2(008) discusses the use of VGI gathered in Second Life as a support for
park design that raises several questions. First, is gathering citizen feedback in this

way sufﬁcient to fulﬁl community involvement requirements? Should input from
VGI be balanced with traditional forms of citizen input, such as town hall style
meetings, and where should it ﬁt compared to forms of citizen participation such as
74                                                        P.A. Johnson and R.E. Sieber


steering committees and citizen design teams? These legal obligations inherent to
governance at all levels are real constraints to the government acceptance of VGI as
a data source, as they privilege the status quo data sources that are known entities,
or at least have failings that are acknowledged. This mismatch between VGI as a

product of often unknown provenance with a variable degree of data quality should
be considered as a signiﬁcant barrier for government adoption of VGI.
   Our own research has found that a lack of complete government control over the
data collected by and displayed on a VGI platform creates considerable anxiety over
deployment. Concerns were present over both the contributed data and the base map

data. With our government partners, we used the proprietary Google Maps platform,
which provided several advantages, including free satellite imagery, built-in
geocoder, and a popular user interface. However, there were also trade-offs, with
inaccuracies present in the base map, and coarse resolution imagery, especially in
rural areas. There was substantial criticism levied at the accuracy of the Google
Maps base map. For example, partners with local knowledge found many misla-

belled roads and names of pre-amalgamation hamlets and villages that were no
longer commonly used. Ofﬁcials assumed that this data shown in Google Maps was
not authoritative and had questions about provenance and update frequency. Later,
when it was discovered that the Canadian federal government base map contained
the same errors, government partners had a more positive view of Google base map

coverage. This positive view was reinforced when change requests submitted to
Google were reﬂected in the base map within weeks, compared to government base
map change requests that could take substantially longer to be reﬂected, often
requiring changes to be published on an annual basis. This example demonstrates
how the provenance of data (the ‘known’ federal data vs. the ‘unknown’ private

company data) can affect willingness to use, regardless of any actual difference
between the data.




   5.3.3      The Jurisdiction of VGI

It is easy to think of geospatial technologies not simply as place representative but

place bound. However, as an online technology, VGI can cross spatial scales ranging
from the local to the global. This has signiﬁcant implications for how governments
interact with citizens and whether the directionality of power ﬂows can be rewired
(Crampton2009; Sieber2004). This phenomenon is termed jumping scale (Co1x998 ;
Smith  1993) and is relevant to a governance context in use of VGI. Jumping scale

refers to an action where individuals operating at one scale (e.g. community scale)
circumvent or bypass an intermediary scale of decision-making (e.g. municipal
government) to argue their issue at a ‘high’ level (e.g. provincial or federal level)
(Cox 1998; Swyngedouw2004). For example, VGI may be generated in response to
a local issue but then communicated to provincial or federal level decision-makers

in a call for intervention. This brings pressure from both the local and national level
5  Situating the Adoption of VGI by Government                                    75


on other levels of government. This cross-scale aspect means that citizens can use
VGI to circumvent the traditional pathways of public participation, though this in
turn may not ﬁt will with formal decision-making structures.
   The cross-scale nature of VGI presents an obstacle to governments in several

ways. First, this type of activity can result in a government losing some control
over a particular issue, as VGI can be communicated without regard to political
boundaries. As VGI is communicated to other levels of government, more players
become implicated in solving or answering an issue. This may be a positive factor,
such as in the case of a resource-constrained local government looking to secure

greater funding from provincial or federal levels to combat a particular problem.
This loss of control also means that a government can be overruled or removed
from the decision-making process. There is a danger that after asking citizens to
contribute on a particular issue, governments may not be able to properly respond
to the citizen feedback, as the required action may be beyond the mandate or geo-
graphic region of the government. For example, a municipal government may ask

for citizen input on land rezoning, yet this rezoning may require provincial or
regional approval. This can create a situation where expectations are raised as to
the type of result that will be delivered. This issue is long-standing in planning; in
that if citizens are to be asked to contribute, a government must be willing and
able to act on that advice (Wittig and Schmitz   1996 ) . Though VGI contributions

may be cross-scale, the political decision-making and mandate of governments
are not equally ﬂexible.
   Our own research in Acton has uncovered the use of VGI to jump scale. We are
working with a community-based watershed management organization in Acton to
deploy a Geoweb site as a conduit for citizen reporting of erosion and other environ-

mental problems. This process is occurring at a watershed scale, which has only
recently become a decision-making boundary in Quebec.The provincial government
has created this new jurisdiction for issues like erosion; however, few mechanisms
are in place to support integration of citizen or community organization perspectives
with the provincial-level policy development process. The community-based ws    aterd

management organization is using the Geoweb to collect its own VGI, which then is
submitted to provincial ministries to support funding grants at the watershed level.
This demonstrates how VGI that is reﬂective of a local perspective can be leveraged
to impact other scales. Local VGI gathered in this manner is used to cross scales,
allowing the community-based organization to argue for improved watershed-level
support from provincial government.




   5.4      Situating Government to Adopt VGI

The generation of VGI and its acceptance by governments is an emerging phenom-

enon, and as such, the adoption challenges to its use and application areﬂuid.
Through the identiﬁcation of constraints to the use of VGI by governments, we aim
to provide increased clariﬁcation as to how the use of VGI can be negotiated. From
76                                                         P.A. Johnson and R.E. Sieber


this analysis we deﬁne three ways that governments can situate themselves to more
fully participate in gathering and using VGI: increased formalization of VGI collec-
tion, encouraging collaboration between governments, and reviving the role that
VGI can play in seeing citizens as partners in knowledge generation and improved

decision-making.



   5.4.1      Increasing Formalization of VGI Collection


For governments to accept and use VGI, one blockage is the value—both real and
perceived—of the data. Without conﬁdence that VGI represents citizen input, gov-
ernments will have a difﬁcult time justifying the use of VGI within their decision-
making tasks. Due to the legal framew ork in which ofﬁcial decision-making must
occur, particularly around issues with a geographic context, such as facility siting,

land use, and property rights, there must be a defensible process followed to justify
taking a course of action that may have negative implications for a certain group of
citizens or that is based on input from citizens. In balancing the needs and desires of
society as a whole, which can involve reconciling many contradictory opinions and
viewpoints, decision-makers must rely on dataand information thatcan be defended

as valuable input from citizens and reﬂectiveof real citizenconcerns. As a new tech-
nology, there are still many questions surrounding the value of VGI compared to
traditional methods of citizen input. For example, what weight should a decision-
maker give to a perspective supported by VGI compared to a perspective supported
by citizens who attended a town hall meeting? Is the method of participtaion (digital
vs. in person) indicative of the strength of agreement or opinion? Though each of

these questions requires signiﬁcant follow-up research, issues concerning the value
of VGI are reﬂective of government concern or focus on process, rather than the
issue itself.
   Due to the structured and formalized way in which government operates, a more
formalized VGI collection process, with a focus on data quality and strict controls

to contribution, and crowdsourced veriﬁcation may po  rve bene ﬁ cial.oFr government
to adopt VGI, linking it to ofﬁcial government structures and decision-making
processes, this may require the institution of speciﬁc rules and regulations that can
constrict or even eliminate participation. Onexeample of this maybe therequirement
to ofﬁcially register on a site usingone’s real name orother identifyingcharacteristic.

The user who feels comfortable contributing VGI anonymously may not feel the
same when asked for identiﬁable information. The identiﬁcation of individual
contributors on some level, not necessarily by name, but as a resident of jurisdiction
may impose a constraint on participation in an ofﬁcial context that would not be
present in a more informal VGI implementation. Despite these constraints on
participation, for VGI to be accepted as a legitimate data source for use in decision-

making, a collection framework that enforces some degree of identiﬁcation and
places a frame on types of participation can beginto address some of thegovernment
concerns surrounding contributed data.
5   Situating the Adoption of VGI by Government                                    77


   5.4.2      Encourage Collaboration Across Governments


We identiﬁed the cross-scale nature of VGI to be a challenge for government
acceptance of VGI. Oneof the main challenges is that governments are restricted to
a certain mandate and constrained geographic area, whereas VGI may be contrib-
uted by individuals outside of the area and on topics that are outside of the mandate

of any one government agency. With increased government collaboration, VGI can
be directed to effect change at the appropriate decision-making level. For example,
VGI collected by a municipal government that indicates action required on the part
of a provincial government is more likely to be acted upon if the provincial govmernt
is involved with or at least aware of its collection. Stronger collaboration between
governments will facilitate the ability of citizens to jump scale. Though this type of

process has beneﬁts for citizens, it may not have similar beneﬁts for governments
and indeed may be actively resisted by governments.
   There are practical reasons for increased collaboration between governments,
such as realizing cost savings in the collection of VGI. This is relevant at the mnicl
level and in rural or remote locations, where the IT support staff required to operate

a VGI collection framework may not exist. This type of collaboration already exists
in many places, as groups of municipal governments will contribute to the shared
development of technologies or the joint funding of IT systems, such as enterprise
GIS (Budic 1994; Harvey 2003). Sharing expertise on VGI development also can
involve collaboration with private enterprises, universities, and non-proﬁts through

the use of open source technology (Hall et a2l.010 ) . Similarly, increased collatorna
between governments can ease the diffusion of VGI technology. One of the main
mechanisms through which technology is transferred in government and organtiizoans
in general is through a community of users (Budic 1994; Onsrud and Pinto 1991 ) .
In many instances, a driving factor in GIS adoption in municipal planning agencies
has been the use in other, similar type agencies. The lessons learned by one agency

can make introduction and adoption in another agency easier. This type of diffusion
can occur over similar government levels (such as municipal) and also to different
scales of government.




   5.4.3      Investigating the Participation Potential of VGI


Fundamentally, the process of citizen generation of VGI, government acceptance of
this input, and resulting action can represent a variety of forms of participation in
governance. Participation can be limited, with citizens treated as passive sensors,
feeding data to higher-level decision-makers in a one-way process. Alternately,zceitis

can be engaged as partners, contributing information as part of a two-way dialogue
surrounding an issue and providing an opportunity for direct democracy, enabled by
information technology. In situating government to adopt VGI, the use of this
approach to facilitating public participation provides one of the most compelling
78                                                          P.A. Johnson and R.E. Sieber


arguments for its adoption and use. In a political climate increasingly deﬁned by
microtargeting of communities of interest and much hyperbole about government
openness and accountability, the acceptance of VGI as an input to decision-making
can position governments as responsive and directly connected to the electorate.

Key to realizing this vision is the translation of citizen VGI into actionable policy, a
process and transformation that is still very much untested. As such, there exists the
potential for VGI generation, with its novelty and experimental status, to be an
unintentional (or regrettably intentional) distraction from conventional and possibly
more effective forms of citizen participation in decision-making.

   The use of VGI within a participatory process can gvie ﬂ exibilittyo governments,
providing a new media with which it can distribute information (e.g. in the form of
KMLs) or make more transparent its practice. Used in this way, VGI presents an
opportunity for governments to both accept large amounts of data directly from
citizens, but also to use that conduit to allow access to government data sets, and
even direct discussions with civil servants and decision-makers. This draws on

PPGIS research in which the process of place-making via a digital form matters as
much if not more than the output—the resulting map or database. Governments can,
with examples like the city-based Apps for Democracy contests (           http://www.
appsfordemocracy.org), spur innovation and entrepreneurship. It also can set new
avenues for engagement, reaching out to under-represented groups and reformatting

the directionality of powerﬂows. This can bring into contact dissimilar groups,
generating conversation, agreement, and eventually action. It is through this type
of communication that deep and lasting changes to governance structures and
communities are created (Wittig and Schmitz 1996 ) .




   5.5      Conclusions

Like the introduction of ICT and GIS into government, there are many possible

constraints to the adoption of VGI. These may be technical, organizational, or
otherwise based on the local context and VGI implementation process. The nego     tina
of these constraints requires that governments identify potential bottlenecks and
proactively position themselves to address them. This is a signiﬁcant challenge and
one that we have aimed to emphasize. There are many ways in which VGI can
add value to government operations. At the most basic level, it represents citizen

input, and when incorporated into governance, there is the potential for VGI to
represent the kind of direct democracy that deﬁnes a vibrant civil society, with
citizens engaged as partners in the co-production of decision support information.
In a more activist fashion, VGI can be considered an expression of citizen perspective
that is often circulated outside of conventional avenues of public participation in

governance. Does VGI have a signiﬁcant role to play as a way to undermine or
circumvent governments, replacing defective governance processes with citizen-led
initiatives? With the increasing devolution of federal and provincial responsibility
to the municipal and community level, or with the wholesale shrinking of govm   ernnts
due to neoliberal policies, can VGI serve multiple roles, as both a response to, and
 5  Situating the Adoption of VGI by Government                                         79

 as an outcome of retrenchment? Much as the social economy seeks to ﬁll the gaps

 of failed neoliberal policies, can VGI and  the communities that createit beconsidered
 a product or service produced without regard to the private and public economies
 (Amin et al.  2002; Carpi 1997 ) ?

    The path towards greater adoption and use of VGI in governance has many barri-
 ers. One signiﬁcant issue that bears further investigation is the integration of VGI
 into the government decision-making process, with a focus on identifying the rea-

 sons why decision-makers would reject or accept VGI for a speciﬁc decision. Implicit
 in this assessment is to compare the level of trust that decision-makers or planners
 would have in a VGI data set, compared to an authoritative data set, provided that
 there is an acceptable level of congruence between the two. With the support of an

 authoritative data set, would the decision-maker trust the VGI data set? Would this
 trust extend to a situation where there is no congruent authoritative data set? And
 similarly, if a VGI data set is in direct conﬂict with an authoritative data set, is this

 sufﬁcient for a decision-maker to question the authoritative data set? What would
 lead the decision-maker to trust the VGI data set over the authoritative data set?
 Identifying other factors outside of simple congruence may illuminate essential com-

 ponents of the decision-making process that are equal to, or perhaps more important
 than the simple accuracy or quality of a data set. For example, does the currency of
 the data set (presuming VGI is more current) matter, particularly in rapidly changing
 political landscapes? Does the fact that VGI represents citizen (and elector) voices

 hold sway with decision-makers, particularly elected ofﬁcials? These questions and
 more related to them are essential avenues of future work in determining the ﬁt or
 failure of VGI within the process of governance and decision-making.


  AcknowledgementsThis research has been funded by the Quebec Ministère des services gou-
 vernementaux program “Appui au passage à la société de l’information” and the Canadian GEOIDE
 Network of Centres of Excellence in Geomatics.




   References

Al-Kodmany, K. (2000). Using Web-Based technologies and geographic information systems in
    community planning. Journal of Urban Technology, 7 (1), 1–30.

 Amin, A., Cameron, A., & Hudson, R. (2002). Placing the social economy. London: Routledge.
 Brewer, G. A. (2006). Designing and implementing E-Government systems: Critical implications
    for public administration and democracy. Administration & Society, 38 (4), 472–499.
 Budhathoki, N., Bruce, B., & Nedovic-Budic, Z. (2008). Reconceptualizing the role of the user of
    spatial data infrastructure. GeoJournal, 72 (3), 149–160.
Budhathoki, N., Nedovic-Budic, Z., & Bruce, B. (2010). An interdisciplinary frame for under-
    standing volunteered geographic information. Geomatica, 64 (1), 11–26.
 Budic, Z. D. (1994). Effectiveness of geographic information systems in local planning.Journal of
    the American Planning Association, 60 (2), 244–263.
 Carpi, T. (1997). The prospects for the social economy in a changing world. Annals of Public and
    Cooperative Economics, 68 (2), 247–279.
 Carver, S., Evans, A., Kingston, R., & Turton, I. (2001). Public participation, GIS, and cyber-

    democracy: Evaluating on-line spatial decision support systems. Environment and Planning
    B: Planning and Design, 28 (6), 907–921.
  80                                                                 P.A. Johnson and R.E. Sieber


  Chadwick, A. (2009). Web 2.0: New challenges for the study of E-democracy in era of informational

      exuberance. I/S: A Journal of Law and Policy for the Information Society, 5 (1), 9–41.
Cox, K. R. (1998). Spaces of dependence, spaces of engagement and the politics of scale,
      or: Looking for local politics. Political Geography, 17 (1), 1–23.
  Crampton, J. (2009). Cartography: Maps 2.0. Progress in Human Geography, 33 (1), 91–100.

   De Longueville, B., Annoni, A., Schade, S., Ostlaender, N., & Whitmore, C. (2010). Digital earth’s
      nervous system for crisis events: Real-time sensor web enablement of volunteered geographic
      information. International Journal of Digital Earth, 3 (3), 242–259.
    Dovey, T., E&ggers, W. (2008). National issues dialogues Web 2.0: The future of collaborative

      government. Washington, DC: Deloitte Research.
 Drummond, W., & French, S. (2008). The future of GIS in planning.        Journal of the American
      Planning Association, 74 (2), 161–174.
  Elwood, S. (2008). Volunteered geographic information: Future research directions motivated by

      critical, participatory, and feminist GIS. GeoJournal, 72 (3), 173–183.
  Elwood, S. (2009). Geographic Information Science: New geovisualization technologies-emerging
      questions and linkages with GIScience research.Progress in Human Geography, 53, 256–263.
  Elwood, S., & Ghose, R. (2004). PPGIS in community development planning: Framing the orga-

      nizational context. Cartographica, 38 (3/4), 19–33.
  Elwood, S., & Leszczynski, A. (2011). Privacy, reconsidered: New representations, data practices,
      and the geoweb. Geoforum, 42 (1), 6–15.
Flanagin, A., & Metzger, M. (2008). The credibility of volunteered geographic information.

      GeoJournal, 72 (3), 137–148.
    Ganapati, S. (2010U  ).sing geographic information systems to increase citizen engagement
      (pp. 1–46). Washington, DC: IBM Center for The Business of Government.
  Ganapati, S. (2011). Uses of public participation geographic information systems applications in

      E-government. Public Administration Review, 71 (3), 425–434.
   Geertman, S. (2006). Potentials for planning support: A planning-conceptual approaEchn.vironment
      and Planning B: Planning and Design, 33 , 863–880.
 Girres, J. F., & Touya, G. (2010). Quality assessment of the French OpenStreetMap dataset.

      Transactions in GIS, 14 (4), 435–459.
 Goelman, A. (2005). Technology in context: Mediating factors in the utilization of planning
      technologies. Environment and Planning A, 37 , 895–907.
  Goodchild, M. (2007). Citizens as sensors: The world of volunteered geography. GeoJournal, 69 ,

      211–221.
   Goodchild, M., & Glennon, J. (2010). Crowdsourcing geographic information for disaster response:
      A research frontier. International Journal of Digital Earth, 3 (3), 231–241.
  Haklay, M. (2010). How good is volunteered geographical information? A comparative study of

      OpenStreetMap and Ordnance Survey datasets. Environment and Planning B: Planning and
      Design, 37 (4), 682–703.
 Haklay, M., Singleton, A., & Parker, C. (2008). Web mapping 2.0: The Neogeography of the
      Geoweb. Geography Compass, 2 (6), 2011–2039.

   Hall, G., Chipeniuk, R., Feick, R., Leah, ., & Deparday, V.(2010). Community-basedproduction
      of geographic information using open source software and Web 2.0. International Journal of
      Geographical Information Science, 24 (5), 761–781.
  Harvey, F. (2003). Developing geographic information infrastructures for local government: The

      role of trust. Canadian Geographer/Le Géographe canadien, 47 (1), 28–36.
 Harvey, F. (2007). Just another private–public partnership? Possible constraints on scientiﬁc
      information in virtual map browsers. Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design, 34 ,
      761–764.

Hudson-Smith, A., Crooks, A., Gibin, M., Milton, R., & Batty, M. (2009). NeoGeography
      and Web 2.0: Concepts, tools and applications.    Journal of Location Based Services, 3   (2),
      118–145.
  Johnson, P. A., & Sieber, R. E. (2011a). Motivations driving government adoption of the Geoweb.
      GeoJournal, 1–14. doi:10.1007/s10708-011-9416-8
  5   Situating the Adoption of VGI by Government                                                81


 Johnson, P. A., & Sieber, R. E. (2011b). Negotiating constraints to the adoption of agent-based

     modeling in tourism planning. Environment and Planning B – Planning and Design, 38 (2),
     307–321.
  Johnson, P. A., Sieber, R. E., Magnien, N., & Ariwi, J. (2012). Automated web harvesting to collect
     and analyse user-generated content for tourism.Current Issues in Tourism, 15(3), 293–299.

  Miller, C. (2007). A beast in the ﬁeld: The Google maps mashup as GIS/2.    Cartographica, 2 (3),
     187–199.
  Nedovic-Budic, Z. (1998). The impact of GIS technologyE   . nvironment and Planning B – Planning
     and Design, 25 (5), 681–692.

  Newman, G., Zimmerman, D., Crall, A., Laituri, M., Graham, J., & Stapel, L. (2010). User-friendly
     web mapping: Lessons from a citizen science website. International Journal of Geographical
     Information Science, 24 (12), 1851–1869.
 Onsrud, H., & Pinto, J. (1991). Diffusion of geographic information innovations.     International

     Journal of Geographical Information Science, 5 (4), 447–467.
Parsons, J., Lukyanenko, R., & Weirsma, Y. (2011). Easier citizen science is better.        Nature,
     471 (7336), 37.
    Pickles, J. (Ed.). (1995). und truth: The social implications of geographic information systems.

     New York: Guilford.
Rouse, J. L., Bergeron, S. J., & Harris, T. M. (2007). Participating in the Geospatial Web:
     Collaborative mapping, social networks and participatory GIS. In A. Scharl & K. Tochterman
     (Eds.), The geospatial web: How geobrowsers, social software and the Web 2.0 are shaping the

     network society (pp. 153–158). London: Springer.
  Saebo, O., Rose, J., & Flak, L. S. (2008). The shape of eParticipation: Characterizing an emerging
     research area. Government Information Quarterly, 25 , 400–428.
 Schuurman, N. (2000). Trouble in the heartland: GIS and its critics in the 1990s.      Progress in

     Human Geography, 24 (4), 569–590.
 Seeger, C. (2008). The role of facilitated volunteered geographic information in the landscape
     planning and site design process. GeoJournal, 72 , 199–213.
  Sieber, R. (2004). Rewiring for a GIS/2. Cartographica, 39 (1), 25–39.

 Sieber, R. (2006). Public participation geographic information systems: A literature review and
     framework. Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 96 (3), 491–507.
  Smith, N. (1993). Homeless/global: Scaling places. In J. Bird, B. Curtis, T. Putnam, G. Robertson,
     & L. Tickner (Eds.), Mapping the futures (pp. 87–119). London: Routledge.

Swyngedouw, E. (2004). Globalisation or ‘glocalisation’? Networks, territories and rescaling.
     Cambridge Review of International Affairs, 17 (1), 25–48.
  te Brömmelstroet, M., & Bertolini, L. (2008). Developing land use and transport PSS: Meaningful
     information through a dialogue between modelers and plannersT  . ransport Policy, 15, 251–259.

 te Brömmelstroet, M., & Schrijnen, P. (2010). From planning support systems to mediated
     planning support: A structured dialogue to overcome the implementation gap.       Environment
     and Planning B: Planning and Design, 37 (1), 3–20.
  Tulloch, D. (2008). Is VGI participation? From vernal pools to video games. GeoJournal, 72 (3),

     161–171.
    Turner, A. (2006 In).troduction to neogeography. Sebastopol: O’Reilly.
 Vonk, G., Geertman, S., & Schot, P. (2005). Bottlenecks blocking widespread usage of planning
     support systems. Environment and Planning A, 37 , 909–924.

Vonk, G., Geertman, S., & Schot, P. (2007). A SWOT analysis of planning support systems.
     Environment and Planning A, 39 , 1699–1714.
 Wittig, M. A., & Schmitz, J. (1996). Electronic grassroots organizing.   Journal of Social Issues,
     52 (1), 53–69.

  Zook, M., & Graham, M. (2007). The creative reconstruction of the Internet: Google and the priva-
     tization of cyberspace and DigiPlace. Geoforum, 38 (6), 1322–1343.
  Zook, M., Graham, M., Shelton, T., & Gorman, S. (2010). Volunteered geographic information and
     crowdsourcing disaster relief: A case study of the Haitian earthquake.    World Medical and
     Health Policy, 2 (2), 7–33.
   Chapter 6

When Web 2.0 Meets Public Participation

GIS (PPGIS): VGI and Spaces of Participatory
Mapping in China



   Wen Lin






 AbstractWhile existing studies provide important insights into power relations

and spatial knowledge production impacted by volunteered geographic information
(VGI), this chapter argues that more research is needed to investigate how these new
geospatial technologies have constituted the actor’s subjectivities and the politics of
citizen participation. Drawing upon publicparticipation GIS (PPGIS)studies, critical
GIS research and critical social theory, this chapter examines the mutual and

complex relationships between subject formation and geospatial technology devel-
opment and their implications for spaces and politics of citizen participation in a
variety of contexts. A case study in China is presented with three examples of VGI
mapping drawn from ethnographicﬁeldwork. These VGI practices in China have
constituted multiple “DigiPlaces,” a notion proposed by Matt Zook and Mark

Graham that is characterized by greater visibility with automatic production,
increased individualism, and dynamism. Furthermore, these practices are simulta-
neously impacted by the complex process of subject constitution, informed by Mark
Poster’s notion of “the mode of information,” marked by the proliferation of
electronic communications that helps to constitute multiple subjectivities. In

particular, coupling with rapid Internet and new communication technology
developments, Chinese citizenship witnessed growing awareness of individual
rights and more decentered self-identities compared to two decades ago. As such,
new spaces of citizen participation are constructed by these VGI practices; however,
signiﬁcant challenges remain regarding the intersection of possibilities and existing
economic and sociopolitical inequalities.






  W. L*in) (
  School of Geography, Politics and Sociology, Newcastle University,
 Newcastle Upon Tyne , UK
e-mail: wen.lin@ncl.ac.uk


D. Sui et al. (eds.), Crowdsourcing Geographic Knowledge: Volunteered Geog83phic
Information (VGI) in Theory and Practice, DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-4587-2_6,
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
84                                                                               W. Lin


      6.1      Introduction


Online mapping is not new. But the recent emergence of a wide array of
geovisual ization technologies combined with Web 2.0 has in the past 5 years

enabled greater user-generated spatial data creation and distribution and has drawn
increasing attention from GIS scholars (cf. Elwood     2009; Goodchild 2007 ; Haklay
et al. 2008; Sui 2008; Crampton 2009). Such spatial data provisions, referred to as
volunteered geographic information (VGI) practices (Goodchild 2007 ) here and     1
carried out by those who usually do not have formal training in GIS or cartography,

often incorporate multimedia representations, including photographs, texts, and
sounds that are tagged with locational information (Elwoo   2009 ) . Research hsatsrted
to examine the social and political impacts of VGI practices on citizen science and
participatory democracy, as well as how these practices might constitute new forms of

surveillance, exclusion, and intrusion into privacy (Elwood 2009, 2010 ) .
   In particular, there have been insightful studies investigating different types of
VGI and how they overlap with and differ from traditional public participation GIS
(PPGIS) practices (Miller 2006; Tulloch 2008; Boulton 2010 ) . In this discussion,
researchers have emphasized greater accessibility and user-friendliness of these

technologies that might enable public participation through mapping. Meanwhile,
existing power relations may also be reinforced and reconﬁgured in VGI production
(Obermeyer 2007; Crutcher and Zook 2009). In addition, various forms of repre-
sentation and constitution of community through VGI have been acknowledged

(Tulloch 2007 ) .
   Nonetheless, as compared to many PPGIS practices that tend to revolve around
goals of particular organizations or communities (Sieber 2006; Elwood and Ghose
2004), VGI production tends to be much more individualized and dynamic (Zook
and Graham 2007). As such, some key questions remain regarding the intersection

between VGI and PPGIS. In particular, how should we conceptualize the complex
interrelations between the broader socioeconomic, political conditions (which may
also be changing) and participatory VGI practices? For example, who is the pp    arttnig
“community” in the face of increasingly individualized VGI practices and possible

“remote” participation enabled by the Internet and other information technologies?
Are the sociopolitical meanings of “participation” in ﬂux as a result? How might the
purposes of participation and interests of various individuals and groups have been
transformed by the wider availability of information technologies and locational
information? What are the convergences and divergences of participatory VGI p     tircaecs

in different contexts that might shape and gvie new meaningsto local data production
and citizen participation?
   This study is part of my ongoing project that seeks to contribute to the existing
discussions regarding the abovementioned questions. Three streams of research frame

my argument here. First, the PPGIS literature provides important insights into under-
standing how power relations are mediated through GIS usage and spatial knowledge


 See Elwood (2010) for a summary of other terms such as neogeography, geoweb, map 2.0, etc.
6  When Web 2.0 Meets Public Participation GIS (PPGIS): VGI and Spaces…           85


production by citizen and grassroots groups. However, these discussions in PPGIS
have been largely framed within the organizational context, which is not adequate for
examining the more individualized VGI practices. Second, critical GIS research has
addressed the issue of subject constitution complicated by geospatial technologies and

pervasive computing. The mutual constitution between the social and the technological
at the level of the body may give new meanings to forms of technology-mediated
participation, community composition, and power relations in civic engagement. Third,
I further draw upon Mark Poster’s “the mode of information” from critical social theory
in cultural studies and communications studies to situate these cultural shifts.

   Through this synthesized framework, I provide an empirical investigation of
participatory VGI practices in China, which are informed by the complex and
dynamic subjectivity constitution and citizenshiptransition in increasinglyurbanized
and globalized China. I suggest that despite thlack of organized citizenparticipation
on various issues, strong state control of spatial knowledge production, and Internet
censorship in China, VGI practices open new spaces for civic engagement and

citizens’ contestation of ofﬁcial discourses in dynamic and subtle ways. At the same
time, I argue that within this context, citizen participation, even through arguably
“open” approaches such as VGI, is inherently limited to practices of “exercising
micro-power and organizing without organization” that carry with them new forms
of exclusion. As such, while there are signiﬁcant differences regarding political

context and democratic participation in China when compared to many Western
polities, these Chinese VGI practices show some interesting shared traits of VGI
elsewhere in the way they constitute self-identities and in their blending of virtual
and physical spaces, which may also give new meanings to participation and the
politics of spatial knowledge production.

   In what follows, the second section discusses the theoretical background of this
research. In the third section, I illustrate the dynamics of Chinese citizenship as an
introduction to the socioeconomic and political conditions of the VGI practices in
China. This is followed by a case study of three VGI examples in China in the fourth
section. Finally, the last section provides conclusions and discussions.




   6.2      Theoretical Background


   6.2.1      VGI and PPGIS: Convergences and Divergences


A growing body of work has sought to examine the purposes of VGI production,
values of such data generation, and associated technological transformation as well
as social and political implications (Goodchild 2007, 2008; Haklay et al. 2008 ; Sui

2008; Elwood 2008, 2009, 2010). Overall, it is recognized that VGI authors are
simultaneously data users and that VGI production is mobile, ubiquitous (Perkins
2008; Haklay et al. 2008), and often times collaborative in a manner similar to
“wiki ﬁ cation” (Su2i008). In particular, the more decentralized mode of VGI data
86                                                                           W. Lin


provision comprised by the local data of lay persons has drawn signiﬁcant attention
from GIS scholars examining implications for citizen science and participatory
democracy (Goodchild2007; Tulloch2007; Boulton2010; Elwood2010 ) . A number

of studies have addressed the overlap between VGI and PPGIS (Tulloch   2007,2008 ;
Miller 2006). Due to the scope of this study, I focus on VGI practices in which the
data creators knowingly generate and share their data publicly, what I call “partici-
patory VGI” practices.
   The rich body of work in PPGIS derives from critiques of GIS in the early 1990s,

which argued that GIS technologies embody a positivist epistemology and prioritize
instrumental rationality over other forms of knowledge production. In response,
signiﬁcant efforts have emerged to broaden the accessibility of data and technology
to citizens and grassroots groups. Researchers have investigated ways of integrating
and representing local knowledge of marginalized groups using conventional GIS

technologies or re-coding GIS into more user-centered packages (GIS/2) (cf. Sieber
2006; Craig et al.2002). A key inquiry in the PPGIS literature is to examine in what
ways spatial knowledge is produced, by whom, and how this process may shape
power relations among different social groups (Sieber 2006; Tulloch 2007 ; Ghose
2007; Elwood2009). PPGIS practices have contradictory outcomes, simultaneously

empowering and disempowering with shifting boundaries of inclusions and exs   ciuns
(Weiner and Harris2003; Elwood2004; Ghose2005). There are also discussions of
possible spatial data abuse and invasion of personal privacy (Pickles    2004 ; Sui
2006). While there are analyses of power relations among individuals in PPGIS
practices (e.g., Elwood 2004; Kyem 2004), existing discussions on social relations

embedded in PPGIS have been largely focused on the roles of organizations and
groups (Sieber 2000; Elwood and Ghose 2004; Tulloch 2007 ) .
   In line with efforts to expand technology accessibility in the PPGIS literature, a
number of claims have been made to the effect that VGI can provide a new form of

participatory mapping, which engages with a broader audience of lay persons
through crowdsourcing, greater user-friendliness, and space and timeﬂexibility
(Miller 2006; Tulloch 2007, 2008; Kreutz 2010 ) . Miller200    (6 ) investigates the
emergence of Google Maps mashups and their impacts on PPGIS. He emphasizes
that the ease, speed, and high interactivity of online map usage along with the

mashability of Google Maps have enabled a participating public. Such a mapping
platform and the example of mashup creation responding to Hurricane Katrina
underline the ideals of a user-centered GIS/2 (ibid). Kreutz(  2010 ) discusses the
issue of “maptivism,” which can be seen as the explicit usage of VGI in activism.
He suggests that these volunteered maps are powerful because they can provide a

feel of connection, connect topics on complex issues, and trigger engagement.
   Meanwhile, researchers have also identiﬁed several limitations of VGI practices
as they may embed existing social inequality and introduce new forms of technical
and social barriers for civic participation (Tulloch007; Crutcher and Zook 2009 ) .
Tulloch 2 (007)notes that while these online mapping applications are much less

constrained geographically, they are more limited generationally. Crutcher and
Zook 2 (009)examine in what ways existing social and economic inequalities are
further intertwined with, and in turn reconﬁgure, the digital mapping landscape.
6  When Web 2.0 Meets Public Participation GIS (PPGIS): VGI and Spaces…           87


They particularly investigate the post-Katrina Google Earth to illustrate how race
has shaped the way people use (or do not use) Google Earth. Kreutz(      2010 ) also
addresses the challenges in maptivism, including possible intrusion of privacy,
embedded propaganda and discrimination, and lack of attention.

    Tulloch (008)provides an insightful examination of overlaps and distinctions
between PPGIS and VGI. In particular, with respect to participation, a core issue of
the overlap between PPGIS and VGI lies in the investigation by individuals of loca-
tions important to them. In the context of PPGIS, it is likely the case that individuals
strive to utilize public datasets to participate in decision-making processes that

impact the places they care about. In the case of VGI, it might be that individuals
create their own datasets rather than using existing public datasets of their beloved
places. In addition, VGI has a casual and entertaining side, which cannot ﬁt easily
within the existing PPGIS theorization of participation. Tulloch addresses two
important distinctions between VGI and PPGIS. One is that technologies used in
VGI are usually outside the conventional GIS software. Second, VGI is largely

about mapping more than decision making, whilePPGIS tends to focuson decisions
and explicitly seeks social change through mapping. Associated with this second
distinction is that VGI authors may create and share their data unknowingly, which
can be a form of “(geo)slavery” (Obermeyer2007). Yet the line of distinctions may
not always beﬁxed, as VGI authors may acquire a more inﬂuential position in a

policymaking process through data creation and sharing.
   Several studies from critical GIS and critical cartography also examine the diver-
gences between VGI and GIS practices (cf. Elwood2010 ) . In particular, burgeoning
VGI practices indicate an emergence of spatial dataset infrastructure as “patchwork”
(Goodchild 2007), which can result in a changing role for citizen and grassroots

groups, who might move from being data petitioners to data providers (Elwood
2008; Perkins 2008; Dormann et al. 2006). Second, new private-sector actors such
as advertisers embedded in these free online mapping tools may get increasingly
involved (Zook and Graham2007), while there are also sign  ﬁicant effortin providing
open-source software (Haklay et al.2008). Third, VGI may reinforce existing social

inequalities, and it may also constitute new forms of exclusion and surveillance,
such as the variable technical capacity to code with open application programming
interfaces (APIs) and possible data abuse made possible by the availability of massive
databases (Elwood 2010; Williams 2007 ) .



   6.2.2      Subjectivities and DigiPlaces


Some scholars from critical GIS have investigated new dimensions of subjectivities
emerging from pervasive computing and geospatial technologies (Elwood        2010 ) ,

such as the data-borg (Schuurman     2004), geocoded citizen (Wilson    2009 ) , and
digital self (Dodge and Kitchin2007). For example, employing the notion of cyborg
that points to the complex mutual constitution of human and machine (Haraway
1991 ) , Schuurman200  (4) suggests a variant of cyborg in the twenty-ﬁrst century,
88                                                                              W. Lin


the data-borg, as the collection and usage of data on our bodies have become much
more signiﬁcant in everyday life. Noting parallel technology advancements that
enable massive database constructions in GIS analysis, Schuurman calls for

attention to an emerging new cyborg that is rich in data at the individual level (ibid).
In particular, through the example of Virtual Coach, which collects athletes’ logging
of daily data to provide correspondent training schedule, Schuurman illustrates how
these daily and long-term data collections can be an extension of the self. Such a
self-reconﬁguration opens up a variety of opportunities as well as risks. On the one

hand, it is empowering for individuals who might adopt a more individually based
training plan. On the other hand, it can be used by powerful conglomerations for
population control and exploitation.
   Kingsbury and Jones (2009) seek to go beyond a fear-hope dialectic often associ-
ated with critical studies of geospatial technology. They argue that Google Earth is

too often seen as “an Apollonian entity composed of control, order, and calculation”
(ibid, p.503). Underscored by this Apollonian view, discussions of this technology
tend to be divided into two opposing views of fear and hope regarding its sociloiptcal
implications. For example, the authors point out that responses to the US Holocaust
Memorial Museum initiative, which shows high-resolution images and photos of

the crisis in Darfur, tend to fall in two opposing lines: applause for the efforts of
educating a broader audience about the geographical contx   et of the crisisor critiques
of possible voyeuristic pleasure gained from viewing these images. Both perspec-
tives are limiting. Rather, Google Earth is also a Dionysian entity that is uncertain,
alluring, and frenzied. This Dionysian interpretation helps to better understand the

multiple ways in which Google Earth is being used in different contexts, frequently
reﬂected in the surﬁng of Google Earth’s alluring and oftentimes bizarre images.
This theorization also recognizes the “casual and entertaining side” of VGI (Tulloch
2008, p.165). Moreover, the authors suggest that the Apollonian involves a politics

with a subjectivity that is sober, rational, calculated, and sincere, while the Dionysian
involves a politics of the artist, anarchist, or hacker that may seem apolitical at ﬁrst
glance. But the Dionysian is also “the place where new ways of political and ethical
thinking emerge” (Kingsbury and Jones 2009 , p.509).
    Gerlach 2(010 )also suggests that emerging Web 2.0 mapping practices go

beyond the subject-object dualism in traditional cartography. He proposes a concept
of “vernacular mappings” to describe the everydayness of mapping practices
cultivated by, for example, OpenStreetMap. He argues that vernacular mapping
consists of “a politics of the aesthetic whereby creative potential is valorized as a
series of political interventions, but not necessarily in a subversive or angst-ridden

manner” (ibid, p.166). Together, these studies underscore the increasingly ubiqui-
tous nature of these VGI mapping practices, which embody a series of complicated
self-expressions and porous boundaries between multiple subjectivities in spatial
knowledge production and politics.
   Zook and Graham( 2007)examine the hybridization of the digital and the

material in “daily lived geographies” (p.1323) through the notion of “DigiPlace,”
which is useful for exploring VGI practices and their implications for spatial knedwgl
production and representation. The authors argue that the algorithms embedded in
and data used by Google Maps and Google Earth can signiﬁcantly inﬂuence how
6  When Web 2.0 Meets Public Participation GIS (PPGIS): VGI and Spaces…             89


physical places are perceived and used. Recognizing that DigiPlace also shares the
power of physical maps in shaping interactions and experiences with place, the
authors suggest three important new characteristics of DigiPlace. First, visibility in

DigiPlace is automatically produced and ﬁltered by code dependent on an entity’s
online presence. Second, DigiPlace is highly individualizedand deﬁes staticrepresen-
tations. Third, DigiPlace signiﬁcantly increases thedynamism of digital cartographic
visualization and is constantly evolving. The construction of DigiPlace thus points
to the increasing blend of code and place. It is crucial to recognize that there are

variable contexts and abilities implicated in creating the spaces of DigiPlace. Each
user interacts differently with the different contexts, and these interactions in turn
inﬂuence their cognition of physical places (ibid).



   6.2.3      Mode of Information and Spatial Narratives


Employing a poststructuralist perspective, Poster1(990) seeks to analyze the intersec-
tions between the historical emergence of a decentered subject and the massive

changes in new communications systems through the notion of “the mode of infor-
mation.” Poster designates three stages in the mode of information: face-to-face, orally
mediated exchange, characterized by symbolic correspondences; written exchange,
characterized by the representation of signs; and electronically mediated exchange,
characterized by informational simulations. Each stage constitutes a particular form of

subjectivity. In the oral stage, the self is constituted as a position of enunciation through
its embeddedness in a totality of face-to-face relations. In the print stage, the self is
constructed as an agent centered in rational/imaginary autonomy. In the electronic
stage, the self is decentered, dispersed, and multiplied in continuous instability (ibid).

These stages are not sequential but coterminous in the present. He further points out
that electronically mediated exchange enables increased distance between addresser
and addressee, which “allows a reconﬁguration of the relation between emitter and
receiver, between the message and its context, between the receiver/subject and
representations of him or herself” (Poster 1990, p.14). Such conﬁgurations in turn

inﬂuence and transform social relations among different institutions, communities,
and individuals. Without doubt, many modern institutions and practices still dominate
social space. Yet Poster maintains that the mode of information is an emergent
phenomenon that affects small but important aspects of everyday life (ibid).
   In particular, with the advent of the Internet, subject constitution occurs through

the mechanism ofinteractivity. These interactive communications lead to the fm oration
of “virtual community” and networks of social relations with characteristics that are
new when compared to historical constructions of community. First, this form of
electronic communication is associated with a certain ﬂuidity of identity. Second,
virtual and real communitiesmirror andconstitute each other, such that participants

code “virtual” reality through categories of “normal” reality (ibid, pp.191–192,
emphasis added). Poster suggests that new media provide hopeful possibilities for
resistance to modernity through complications of subjecthood that denaturalize the
process of subject formation and put into question the interiority of the subject and
90                                                                            W. Lin


its coherence. However, these possibilities are not guaranteed by the diffusion of
new media communication technologies. Indeed, information technologies can
just as well providetotalitarian control rather than the decentralized, multiple “little
narrativity” of postmodern culture (ibid, p.198).

   As such, in resonance with Kingsbury and Jones’s(         2009 ) argument for a
Dionysian view of Google Earth, the notion of the mode of information extends
beyond the dualism of fear-hope that is so often taken up when one views electronic
communications. Moreover, this notion “mode of information” stresses the role of
multiple forms of media in shaping subjectivities and social relations, which I argue

is an important addition for the discussion of VGI and PPGIS practices.
   Media has indeed been considered to play an important role in knowledge
production (Flew and Liu 2011 ) . In particular, Habermas’      1s99 ) notion of the
“public sphere” characterized by dialogic conversations and facilitated by the mass
media has been an important lens for understanding the emergence of liberal-ctaapliist
institutions in Europe (Flew and Liu 2011). Recently, how public spheres and civic

engagement have been shaped and constituted by Internet communications has been
widely debated. A number of writers have discussed the potential of enabling a
virtual public sphere (e.g., Rheingold 1994; Poster 1997). On the other hand, some
have argued that the Internet mainly reinforces preexisting social relations between
the state and society (e.g., Drezner 2005). Still some others have acknowledged the

complex mixture of control and liberation tendencies of the Internet (e.g., Wa2f11 ) .
Meanwhile, geographers have examined GIS through the perspective of viewing it
as a form of media (e.g., Sui and Goodchild2003). Nonetheless, how the new media
and VGI might have shaped subject formation and in turn impacted the meaning of
political community and civic engagement has not been investigated, which this

chapter seeks to explore through the case of China. In particular, it is important
to take into account a broader context of Chinese citizenship in transition when
investigating VGI and public participation in China.



   6.3      Dynamics of Chinese Citizenship


Citizenship here refers to “a range of legal, political, social, and economic links
between the state and members of society” (Goldman and Perry2002, p. 3). In par-
ticular, citizenship is viewed as an instituted process (Woo       2002 ) , which is

fragmented, constantly formed and negotiated, and disrupted at multiple sites
(Staeheli 2010). In the Maoist era (1949–1976), the notion of citizenship was ﬁlled
with the rhetoric of class struggle, collectivism, and altruism, becoming “cultural
templates for a Chinese ‘socialist’ subjectivity” (Keane2001, p.3). In this discourse,
individual rights are viewed as economic, social, and cultural beneﬁts (Keane 2001 ) .

The view that framed rights as concessionsrather than as entitlementshas undergone
some modiﬁcations in the post-Mao era (Goldman and Perry 2002 ) . Keane200       (1 )
observes that during the 1990s, economic governance (effective at mobilization of
the individual) has superseded nationalism (characterized by mass mobilization) as
6  When Web 2.0 Meets Public Participation GIS (PPGIS): VGI and Spaces…
                                                                                     91

the major mechanism of social organization. Certain groups of intellectuals have

begun to think of citizenship as the assertion of political and civil rights. Concrete
actions in lawsuits, village elections, and entrepreneurial organizations have also
been taken to exercise and expand these rights (Goldman and Perry       2002 ) .
   Meanwhile, the past decade also saw the state’s increasing interests in construct-

ing e-governance in China (Lin 2008). The stated goals of these state programs
include facilitating e-commerce and increasing citizen participation. While many
have argued that the latter may largely remain on paper (Lin and Ghose 2010 ) , the
e-governance discourse has fueled the state’s efforts in building infrastructures for

digital communications. Also, the economic reforms have signiﬁcantly transformed
China’s media landscape, which has stimulated the need for the assessment of public
opinion on issues that are directly related to the reform process. As such, the past
decade witnessed a change of the role of public opinion in national policymaking

that may go beyond state control (Yang 2009 ) .
   Most recently, observers argue that with the rapid growth of Internet users in
China, the Internet has played a much bigger role for public opinion discussions
(Gao 2009; Tai 2006), as the state remains tight control over the mass media

(Yang 2009). No doubt that the Internet has been heavily regulated and censored
in China (Yang 2009; MacKinnon 2010 ) . However, as Yang            200(9, p.45) notes,
“[a]s power seeks domination, it incurs resistance.” Many Chinese netizens have
learned to use a range of strategies and technologies, such as using alternative

proxies or VPN (virtual private network) services to circumvent the Internet
censorship (MacKinnon 2010). China had 485 million Internet users in June
2011 (CNNIC 2011), rising from 22.5 million in 2000. The mobile telephone

has become an important device for Internet access. However, there remain
signiﬁcant inequalities between urban regions and rural areas (CNNIC             2011 ;
Michael and Zhou 2010). The Internet has transformed the arena of public opinion
in Chinese society in at least three ways. First, it creates a new platform forChinese

Internet users to express their opinions online on many issues. Second, it generates
“a steady, core cohort of opinion leaders” that constantly guides public opinion
in cyberspace. Third, it allows an increasing number of Chinese Internet users
to be exposed to other net users’ opinions (Tai 2006, p.188). Associated with these

transformations is greater awareness of indi vidual rights and strong contestations
against hegemonic and authoritarian governance (Yang         2009 ) .
   The changing citizenship can be reﬂected in various forms, including active
online activism in China in the past decade (Yang 2009; Tai 2006 ) .Another such

form is the phrase “onlookers to change China,” which emerged in 2010. This phrase
ﬁrst appeared in an editorial opinion in Southern Weekend (Xiao     2010 ) , known as a


 2
 Despite China’s increasingly sophisticated censorship system, a number of studies contend that
Chinese Internet users have engaged in numerous forms of activism (Yang; Tai2006 ) . In this
way, dynamic communities have emerged that can be mobilized by the Internet to act in various
issues, such as mobilizing the public for environmental protection by Web-based environmental
volunteer groups (Yang2003)and organizing workers’ strikes through the Internet and mobile
technologies (Qiu2009 ) .
92                                                                             W. Lin


liberal newspaper in China. This editorial as widely cited, andthe phrase“onlookers
to change China” was then picked up quickly by many Chinese netizens. Hu203      (11 )
describes this as the “surrounding gaze,” illustrating its historical root in modern

Chinese literature and culture and its new meanings in the information age. The
surrounding gaze from the “crowd” exerts strong pressure on those being watched.
In particular, the recent emergence of social networking websites such as microblog
sites (e.g.,ww.weibo.com) has been acknowledged toattract a muchwider audience

for hot topic discussions. The onlookers’ gaze often takes the digital form of online
posts regarding particular social issues that are then forwarded to circulate infoioan
widely on social networking sites and blogsT . his form of participationmay represent
one of the bottom levels of citizen participation depicted by Arnstein (1969 ) . But in

some respects, the usage of these Internet sites can construct multiple DigiPlaces
and, in some cases, form a multitude of public spheres. This evolving hybrid digital
citizenship has important imprints on the emerging VGI practices in China, which
are discussed below. The empirical investigation is built on document analysis and
personal interviews with VGI practitioners by the author.



   6.4      VGI Practices in China


On January 15, 2009, Ogle Earth posted an article that asked, “Is China opening up to
neogeography?” (http://www.ogleearth.com/2009/01/is_china_openin.htm       ).lThis post

responded to the news that China has started to build up a Chinese version of “Google
Earth.” It pointed out an important issue regarding state control over spatial resources
as well as the Internet censorship constraining the possibilities of VGI practices in
China, despite a more open and relaxed attitude by China’s leadership when it comes

to mapping tools. Nonetheless, this article does not address the non-state practices in
online mapping and geographic knowledge production. There have been active grass-
roots efforts in generating VGI on a variety of issues including environmental protec-
tion, crisis mapping, and political contestation and resistance in China (Li2010 ) . In
the following, I discuss three examples of such participatory VGI practices to show in

what ways VGI can reconﬁgure and create spaces of civic participation in China.



   6.4.1      Map of Relief Support and Needs
         in the Sichuan Earthquake


One example of these practices is a Google Maps mashup map created on May 17,
2008, after the May 12 earthquake in Sichuan (Fig. 6.1). One creator of this map
noted that the reason to create this map was that, previously, it was too complicated


 For example, a search of this editorial opinion from Google site in China ( www.google.com.hk)
returned 328,000 results on July 31, 2011. The number of results increased to 648,000 on October
29, 2011.
6  When Web 2.0 Meets Public Participation GIS (PPGIS): VGI and Spaces…
                                                                                      93






















 Fig. 6.1The map of relief support and needs in Sichuan earthquake (retrieved May 21, 2008)


to show such information in tabular form (DingA 4 , pril 2010, personal communicta ion).
There were around23 volunteers to help update this map (ibid). A post to announce

the creation of this map and call for volunteers to submit any related data regarding
the relief efforts was posted on Douban ( www.douban.com), a popular social net-
working site in China. This post provided links to detailed instructions of how to

make contributions to the map. In particular, a speci ﬁ c format o mfap data submission
was identiﬁed as follows: location, time, veriﬁcation (yes/no), and conteIn  ntf.orma tion
shown on the map eventually was from tw     o major sources: one was thecollection by
volunteers from radio and TV reports and nongovernmental organizations on site,

while the other was from the data directly announced by the government.
   Ding has a background in human-computer interactions, and he considered using
an IBM open-source package. But eventually, Google Maps was chosen, as “it was
convenient and very user-friendly” (Ding, April 2010, personal communication).

Ding noted that engineers from Google also collaborated in this project at a later
stage. The left part of the map site provides information on the symbols used and a
note on the sequence of the listed items. There are eight symbols, of which red
exclamation marks are for trapped people, bottles and apples for water and food,

green triangles for tents, baskets for a variety of other materials, trucks for vehicles,
wrenches for engineers, andﬂags for volunteers. While the speciﬁc process of
selecting these symbols is unknown, this use of symbology is more sophisticated
than the two other examples.

   There were 82,539 hits within a week after this map’s creation, and it soon
reached a million hits. Moreover, some NGOs on the site of disaster also used this



 Pseudonyms are used for the interviewees.
94                                                                             W. Lin





















 Fig. 6.2 Map of violent evictions (retrieved January 19, 2012)


map to assist their relief efforts (Ding, April 2010, personal communication). It is
also notable that this is a project that involved a large number of people in a very

short period of time. As noted by Ding, this scale and the level of collaboration and
coordination reﬂected in this map was quite rare at the time: “It is a range of different
factors together that contributed to this map. The impact of this earthquake is really
astonishing” (ibid).
   Indeed, this Sichuan earthquake relief efforts map in part represents the outpour-

ing of volunteer efforts in the aftermath of this earthquake. Meanwhile, this map has
paralleled with the Hurricane Katrina map (Miller      2006), the crisis mapping of
Haiti’s earthquake in 2010, and many other crisis mapping activities around the
world. While crisis mapping efforts have continued to evolve and grow worldwide,
such crisis mapping efforts in China, based on evidence at hand, have not evolved

into the relatively more stable mapping community noted in Meier(             2011 ) .
Nonetheless, this Sichuan map marks one of the earliest efforts of relatively large
scale collaborations of VGI provision in China. A most recent example of such a
scale of collaboration is a map on violent evictions in China, which was generated

in October 2010 and subsequently drew signiﬁcant attention from the mainstream
media (Fig. 6.2). Part of the goal of the violent eviction map is to dissuade people
from purchasing houses connected to such evictions.



   6.4.2      Map of China’s Mining Accidents


The second example is a map titled “Map of China’s Mining Accidents in 2010”
(Fig. 6.3), created by Wang. This map is an example of mapping by an individual to
address a particular social issue in China. The mapping was derived from Wang’s
6  When Web 2.0 Meets Public Participation GIS (PPGIS): VGI and Spaces…                 95






















 Fig. 6.3Map of China’s mining accidents in 2010 (retrieved January 19, 2012)


strong concern about the mining accidents in China. Wang created a mashup for each

mining accident reported in the news. The major information in the description of
each mashup includes the following ﬁelds: time of accident, location, cause, casualty,
and media report source. Each color of the mashup indicates a particular range of

casualties, with purple represen5ing more than 20 deaths, red 10–20 deaths, green
5–10 deaths, and blue below 5.The VGI author noted that, technically, it was easy for
him to create a map like this. However, it was quite time consuming, especially in the
beginning of this process. He read news during the daytime and usually searched

related news when he had some spare time in the evening to see if any reported mining
accident might have been missed. Another time-consuming issue is that sometimes it
was difﬁcult to obtain accurate coordinates using the address reported in the news.

He noted that when Google Maps was zoomed in to the county level in China, it was
in some cases hard to pin down the accurate location of a village or a county.
   Wangﬁrst posted this map on his blogs in mid-January and kept updating his
map to cover the accidents reported in 2010. He also posted a link on Twitter. The

map soon received a signiﬁcant number of hits after its creation. “Just a few days,
there were about thousands of views” (Wang, July 2010, personal communication).
Many viewers left comments responding to his blog posts or replied to his Twitter

posts. Many were shocked to see the number of mining accidents and associated
casualties; some thanked the VGI author for making this map. There were also a few
errors that were pointed out by his Twitter followers (he had around 7,000 Twitter



 Initially, this map used only one color for the symbols, along with description of the number of
deaths in the pop-up window of each mashup. During my interview with the VGI author, I noted

the possibility of using different colors to indicate different classes of values. This map in turn
adopted the current set of legend.
96                                                                            W. Lin





















 Fig. 6.4 Map of sale/lease ratio (retrieved January 19, 2012)


followers at the time of this mapping practice). “Mostly they were shocked… [They
said that the accidents were] as thick as huckleberries [in the map]” (ibid).

   When Wang started to make this map, he had already created several similar maps
in the recent past. His experience of creating Google Maps mashup maps can be
traced back to the ﬁrst one he made on impacts of environmental pollution in June
2009. In particular, the issue of “cancer villages” due to severe environmental pollu-
tion was ﬁrst reported by Phoenix Weekly, a Hong Kong-based news magazine, and

a Twitter user posted a tweet calling for a map on these villages. Wang volunteered
to make the map. Since then, he made a few more maps, including one map for
Greenpeace on water quality issues and another one on lead poisoning in China.
   Wang noted that this way of mapping was meant to record ongoing events, espe-

cially problems that have emerged in the process of China’s economic development.
“It is something like my personal documentation of the history… While the sources
are from the ofﬁcial reports, they won’t compile such information in this way and
provide it to the public” (Wang, July 2010, personal communication). As such, this
map, along with other Google Maps applications he created, provides an important

representation of his concerns about social problems. These online maps are the
VGI author’s spatial narratives. They were disseminated quickly through some
major social networking sites, especially Twitter in this case.



   6.4.3      Map of Sale/Rent Ratio


The third example is a map of the ratio of sale to lease price to illustrate the high
housing price in urban China, which was created using unofﬁcial data through
crowdsourcing (Fig. 6.4). In this Google Maps representation,ﬁrst created on
February 26, 2010, there are ﬁve ranges of values for a point symbology. If the ratio
6  When Web 2.0 Meets Public Participation GIS (PPGIS): VGI and Spaces…
                                                                                       97

is below 20 to 1, it is marked as green, 20–30 to 1 as blue, 30–40 to 1 as purple,

40–50 to 1 as yellow, and above 50 to 1 as red.
   Liang, the author of this map, is a photographer whose work has long focused on
urban life and urbanization in China. He also used his blog and Twitter to broadcast
this project. In one of his tweets on February 26, 2010, he wrote:

   Continue my survey of the ratio of sale to lease price in China on Twitter. I use google
   spreadsheets(you need to hop over the wall to see them) to collect data. The web address
   for data submission is […]. All materials collected will be integrated into a google map
   [map link…] All data are open to the public, @(another Twitter user) helps to tweet on this.
   (translation by author)

   In another tweet soon followed, he noted:

   Continue to use Twitter to collect the information of the ratio of sale to lease price. I don’t
   seek to gain comprehensive information; rather, I’m interested in knowing a handful of
   relevant information. It is the Twitter friends that make up the statistics bureau. Twitter
   friends from Hong Kong and Taiwan are welcome to participate. The web address [for the
   survey] is […] (you need to hop over the wall to see this); the web address for the result
   summary is […]. (translation by author)

   These tweets are quite telling, not only in terms of how Liang collected the data,
but in their use of metaphors that capture how Liang constructed the map. First, it is
apparent that Liang used a range of available online venues to collect information to

address a particular issue, which can be seen as a type of crowdsourcing. When
asked later how he could ensure the quality of the submitted data, Liang said that he
knew there would be lots of random information submitted and that he would judge
the quality by himself. If there was something that was too ridiculous, he would not

use that data (Liang, August 2010, personal communication). Second, there were
several metaphors employed, such as the term “wall,” which referred to a ﬁrewall
installed by the state for Internet censorship. In particular, the term “Twitter friends”

referred generally to a broad range of Twitter users, known and unknown to Liang.
This term is also frequently used by other Twitter users in China. Because Twitter is
blocked in China, it is recognized that discussions on Twitter by Chinese users are
often more political compared to those of other users elsewhere. In this sense, these

Chinese Twitter users form certain political communities on Twitter, which are ﬂuid
and have constantly changing boundaries. It is not uncommon to see online com-
ments on many hotly debated social issues like “Twitter sightseeing group come
here to witness this issue,” requesting onlookers to show their concern. Third, the

purpose of conducting this survey and making this map, as noted by Liang, is due to
the lack of trust of the ofﬁcial data and an attempt to depict the pressure of urban life
by the citizens themselves. As such, this map allows spatial narratives that represent
resistance to the state, not only speaking against the ofﬁcial data source, but also

questioning the burden citizens bear in the process of China’s rapid urbanization
(seen often to be stimulated by state-led land speculation).
   This map was once open to the public for edits. However, there were some lines
added such as lines between two random locations with a note suggesting how to

get from one location to the other. In addition, the title of the map was changed to
“Far East Map.” These edits were noticed during the time of myﬁeldwork from
July to August 2010. Liang was surprised to see these abovementioned edits, which
98                                                                             W. Lin


were obviously not related to the original theme of this map (Liang, August 2010,
personal communication). Upon the most recent visit of this map’s site, this map
receives more than 53,000 hits and is not available for public editing, with the

latest update marked on September 14, 2010. As such, this is at least an 8-month
project with 64 records collected. It is not the ﬁrst VGI map made by Liang. His
ﬁrst map was on locations of his exhibits, after which he made a few maps includ-
ing one on a tour of photographing Chinese county governments’ main ofﬁce
buildings, which involved 23 counties from 11 provinces. Explaining why he made

these maps, Liang noted, “First, it’s fun. Second, it’s useful.” Liang further
described that mapping in this way was like “writing diaries on the map” (Liang,
August 2010, personal communication).
   In sum, there are several characteristics of these VGI constructions in the process
of data collection and delivery, representation, and analysis. First, these maps are

usually initiated by individuals, which may evolve into a collaborative project,
remain an individual commitment, or continue as a dynamic mix of these two.
Moreover, these VGI authors are quite savvy in using a variety of online venues to
circulate their maps. In particular, social networking sites play an important role.
Second, because of the topics covered in these VGI constructions, accuracy oftlioocnas

does not seem to be a dominant concern in the mapping processes. The cartographic
design may also be rudimentary. Yet the mapping is not a static process, and the
authors may learn from their past experiences, reﬂected in the second example
regarding the change of its legend. Third, the purposes behind these mapping
constructions and associated analyses vary, ranging from personal interest in docu-

menting daily practices to addressing broader social issues. Therefore, such VGI
constructions engage participants from different backgrounds, each construction
forming a loose and constantly changing community engaged in the use and devel-
opment of these maps. However, the VGI authors being interviewed in this project

(with a total number of 12 at the time of this writing) are all men, mostly in their
30s, who have used the Internet intensively.
   Furthermore, the acknowledgment of “personal documentation of the history”
and “writing diaries on the map” indicates that these mapping practices provide
important spatial narratives for these VGI authors. That the attention to social and

political issues through VGI mapping represents a gaze from the participants and
map viewers underscored changing citizenship in China with greater awareness of
political rights that are exercised and negotiated through contestations of and resis-
tances to dominant state power. A VGI author may have more than one map created.
As such, a VGI practitioner may navigate from a map of interested places to a map

of environmental pollution sites in China, traversing the boundaries between private
and public, personal and political. These practices act as a “mode of information”
(Poster 1990) mediated by Web 2.0 and geospatial technologies, and they construct
multiple DigiPlaces (Zook and Graham        2007)that are hybrid, interactive, and
mobile. They can be seen as a form of micro-politics, which can be described as

“organizing without organization” (Hu 2011 ) .
   Meanwhile, with these forms of dynamic inclusion addressed above, there are new
forms of exclusion. First, while there has been asigni ﬁ cant increase tohfe number of
6  When Web 2.0 Meets Public Participation GIS (PPGIS): VGI and Spaces…            99


netizens in China in the past decade, the issue ofa digital divide remainsa signi ﬁ cant
challenge, especially among the urban users and rural ones (e.g., Michael and Zhou
2010). Second, the examples cited here suggest that active VGI authors are over-
whelmingly young and male, with a great deal of experience using the Internet. More

research is needed on the demographic underpinnings regarding VGI practices.



   6.5      Conclusion


While this case study by no means depicts the whole picture of VGI practices in
China, the above analysis shows that a synthesized theoretical framework from
PPGIS, critical GIS, and critical social theory helps to understand complex mapping
practices and their sociopolitical implications situated in different contexts. VGI
practices in China discussed here simultaneously share some traits with, and differ

from, existing VGI practices in the West regarding spatial knowledge production
and meanings of community, participation, and civic engagement. In particular,
these VGI practices share the major characteristics of DigiPlaces, marked by
increasing individualism, dynamism, and digitally generated visibility (Zook and
Graham2007). As shown in the above VGI examples, these online, interactive m    ping

practices are usually initiated by individuals.Subsequent mapping maybe conducted
by a singular individual or by a larger group of volunteers. These visualizations are
usually prompted by these VGI authors’ concerns for particular issues, rather than
proposed from a particular organizational agenda. These mapping constructions
evolve over time. As such, these VGI visualizations are highly dynamic.

   These VGI practices create new participatory spaces but also new exclusions.
Through these mapping practices and constructionsof DigiPlaces, new participatory
spaces are produced, transcending the virtual and the physical in a complex and
nuanced way. The speciﬁc goals ofsetting up these maps mayvary greatlydepending
on their particular content. Yet these practices all strive to utilize the power of

visualization to broadcast a particular concern to a broader audience and to send a
political message with these visualizations. These mapping platforms therefore
provide new spaces for the VGI authors to express such concerns. These concerns
are shared by a larger community, evident in relatively high total counts of hits for
these VGI products. These practices do not stay digital only. Rather, they are actively
constructed and reconstructed with actions in non-digital spaces, such as the relief

efforts in the ﬁrst example, or the violent eviction map attempting to persuade people
from purchasing houses with history of evictions. It is difﬁcult to measure the actual
extent of impacts of such mapping in mobilizing a broader community. Nonetheless,
such seemingly mundane actions of documenting, watching, and monitoring through
visualization, which can be disseminated quite widely,are indicativeof an important

form of participation and engagement from the bottom and grassroots in China. On
the other hand, multiple levels ofxclusion emerge in theseprocesses. Such mapping
practices require little formal training in cartography or GIS. However, they still
require a certain level of familiarity with the tool and with the online mapping
 100                                                                              W. Lin


 interface, as well as a certain level of time commitment on top of the existing digital
 divide regarding Internet access.

    Moreover, the boundaries and composition of the “community” involved in these
 VGI practices have been inﬂuenced by the dynamic interplay between Web 2.0
 technologies and political and social landscapes in China. On the one hand, these
 VGI practices change the traditional power relations of spatial data provision and

 representation, resulting in patchworks of spatial data provision (Goodchild    2008 ) .
 Yet such spatial data productions in China migh  etmbody an additional, if nodtifferent,
 layer of political meanings when compared to other VGI practices such as
 OpenStreetMap. These multiple patchworks of spatial data productions in China

 constitute micro-power and a way of organizing without organization. In an environ-
 ment of strong state control characterized by hegemony, such mapping practices by
 these “onlookers” are informed by and intersected with a changing citizenship
 identity that is also inﬂuenced by a mode of information (Poster 1990 ) . To borrow

 James Scott’s term, this mode of participation can be seen as a “weapon of the weak”
 (Scott 1987). In addition, these participatory VGI practices are also intersected with
 the entertaining side of mapping and playfulness of spatial narratives, constituting a
 mixture of the Apollonian and the Dionysian dimensions of politics. On the other

 hand, these participatory efforts are intersected by lines of class, age, and gender in
 the shifting social fabric in China in the context of urbanization and globalization.
    More broadly, the dynamics of sociopolitical contexts in China that have shaped
 China’s VGI practices might differ greatly from other societal contexts. But the
 complexities of DigiPlaces construction, intersected with Web 2.0 technologies,

 share some important traits with instances in the West, as noted above; these include
 increasing engagements at the individual level, exempliﬁed in these VGI practices.
 If Habermas is right about the impact of mass communication media, which made
 the reception of media products a form of privatized appropriation, and in turn

 shaped the construction of public spheres and citizen participation (Thompson
 1995), then what does it mean that through the new media of the Internet, and Web
 2.0 in particular, spatial narratives constantly merge private traits into publicly
 available platforms and individual bodies into networks? How can these various

 modes of information come into play in constituting spatial knowledge production
 and civic engagement? It is through this perspective that perhaps PPGIS and VGI
 are deeply intertwined with respect to implications for spatial politics and,
 consequently, possible forms of technology-, data-, and media-mediated public

 participation in the so-called information age.



   References

 Arnstein, S. (1969). A ladder of citizen participationJ.ournal of the American Institute of Planners,
    35 (4), 216–224.
Boulton, A. (2010). Just maps: Google’s democratic map-making community?  Cartographica,
    45 (1), 1–4.
CNNIC (China Internet Network Information Center). (2011). The 28th statistical report on internet
    development in China.ttp://www.cnnic.net.cn/dtygg/dtgg/201107/W020110719521725234p6d3f2..
    Accessed November 15, 2011.
  6   When Web 2.0 Meets Public Participation GIS (PPGIS): VGI and Spaces…                     101


  Craig, W. J., Harris, T. M., & Weiner, D. (Eds.). (2002. ommunity participation and geographical

      information systems. London: Taylor and Francis.
Crampton, J. (2009). Cartography: Performative, participatory, political.     Progress in Human
      Geography, 33 (6), 840–848.
 Crutcher, M., & Zook, M. (2009). Placemarks and waterlines: Racialized cyberscapes in

      post-Katrina Google Earth. Geoforum, 40 , 523–534.
  Dodge, M., & Kitchin, R. (2007). Outlines of a world coming into existence: Pervasive computing
      and the ethics of forgetting.   Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design, 34          ,
      431–445.

  Dormann, C., Caquard, S., Woods, B., & Biddle, R. (2006). Role-playing games in cybercartogra-
      phy: Multiple perspectives and critical thinking. Cartographica, 41 , 47–58.
 Drezner, D. (2005). Weighing the scales: The internet’s effect on state-society relations. Paper
      presented March 2005 at conference: “Global Flow of Information,” Yale Information Society

      Project, Yale Law School.      http://islandia.law.yale.edu/isp/GlobalFlow/paper/Drezner.pdf.
      Accessed November 15, 2011.
 Elwood, S. (2004). Partnerships and participation: Reconﬁguring urban governance in different
      state contexts. Urban Geography, 25 (8), 755–770.

  Elwood, S. (2008). Volunteered geographic information: Future research directions motivated by
      critical, participatory, and feminist GIS. GeoJournal, 72 , 173–183.
   Elwood, S. (2009). Geographic information science: New geovisualization technologies – emerging
      questions and linkages with GIScience research.     Progress in Human Geography, 33       (2),

      256–263.
  Elwood, S. (2010). Geographic information science: Emerging research on the societal implica-
      tions of the geospatial web. Progress in Human Geography, 34 (3), 349–357.
 Elwood, S., & Ghose, R. (2004). PPGIS in community development planning: Framing the

      organizational context. Cartographica, 38 (3–4), 19–33.
  Flew, T., & Liu, R. (2011). Who’s a global citizen? Julian Assange, WikiLeaks and the Australian
      media reaction. Paper presented at Australian and New Zealand Communication Association
      (ANZCA) 2011 annual conference, Communication on the Edge: Shifting Boundaries and

      Identities, University of Waikato, Hamilton, New Zealand, July 6–8, 2011.
  Gao, B. (2009). Observations of China’s civil society in 2009: The formation of the social ﬁeld.
      Bolan Qunxhu, 3 , 2010.
Gerlach, J. (2010). Vernacular mapping, and the ethics of what comes next, guest editorial.

      Cartographica, 45 (3), 165–168.
 Ghose, R. (2005). The complexities of citizen participation through collaborative governance.
      Space and Polity, 9 (1), 61–75.
Ghose, R. (2007). Politics of scale and networks of association in public participation GIS.

      Environment and Planning A, 39 , 1961–1980.
 Goldman, M., & Perry, E. (Eds.). (2002).    Changing meanings of citizenship in modern China .
      Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
  Goodchild, M. (2007). Citizens as sensors: The world of volunteered geography. GeoJournal, 69 ,

      211–221.
  Goodchild, M. (2008). Commentary: Whither VGI? GeoJournal, 72 , 239–244.
    Habermas, J. (1989  T)h.e structural transformation of the public sphere . Cambridge, MA: MIT
      Press.

 Haklay, M., Singleton, A., & Parker, C. (2008). Web mapping 2.0: The neogeography of the
      GeoWeb. Geography Compass, 2 (6), 2011–2039.
    Haraway, D. (1991S)i.mian, cyborgs and women: The reinvention of nature         . New York:
      Routledge.

  Hu, Y. (2011). The surrounding gaze.  http://huyongpku.blog.163.com/blog/static/1243594962011
      012113731103/  . Accessed November 15, 2011.
    Keane, M. (2001). Rede ﬁ ning Chinese citizenEsc   hin.omy and Society, 30 (1), 1–17.
 Kingsbury, P., & Jones, J. P. (2009). Walter Benjamin’s Dionysian adventures on Google Earth.
      Geoforum, 40 , 502–513.
   102                                                                                    W. Lin


   Kreutz, C. (2010). Maptivism – Maps for activism transparency and engagement, speech given at

      Re:publica 2010, Berlin.  http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=47zn9sz1DcQ&feature=player_
      embedded  . Accessed September 15, 2011.
 Kyem, P. (2004). Of intractable conﬂicts and participatory GIS applications: The search for
      consensus amidst competing claims and institutional demands. Annals of the Association of

      American Geographers, 94 (1), 37–57.
 Lin, W. (2008). GIS development in China’s urban governance: A case study of Shenzhen.
      Transactions in GIS, 12 (4), 493–514.
  Lin, W. (2010). Emerging neogeographic practices in China: (New) spaces of participation and

      resistance? Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the Association of American Geographers,
      Washington, DC, April 14–18, 2010.
  Lin, W., & Ghose, R. (2010). Social constructions of GIS in China’s changing urban governance:
      The case of Shenzhen. Cartographica, 45 (2), 89–102.

   MacKinnon, R. (2010). Networked authoritarianism in China and beyond: Implications for global
      internet freedom. Paper presented at Liberation Technology in Authoritarian Regimes, Stanford
      University, October 11–12, 2010.   http://iis-db.stanford.edu/evnts/6349/MacKinnon_Libtech.
      pdf. Accessed November 15, 2011.

   Meier, P. (2011). What is crisis mapping? An update on the ﬁeld and looking ahead.//irevotion.
      net/2011/01/20/what-is-crisis-mapping/. Accessed November 15, 2011.
  Michael, D., & Zhou, Y. (2010). China’s digital generation 2.0: Digital media and commerce go
      mainstream. Boston Consulting Group Report.

   Miller, C. (2006). A beast in the ﬁeld: The Google maps mashup as GIS/2. Cartographica, 41 (3),
      187–199.
   Obermeyer, N. (2007). Thoughts on volunteered (geo)slavery.http://www.ncgia.ucsb.edu/projects/
      vgi/participants.html Accessed June 24, 2011.

   Perkins, C. (2008). Cultures of map use. The Cartographic Journal, 45 (2), 150–158.
     Pickles, J. (200A).history of spaces: Cartographic reason, mapping and the geo-coded world .
      New York: Routledge.
     Poster, M. (1990T)h. e mode of information: Poststructuralism and social context . Chicago:

      University of Chicago Press.
  Poster, M. (1997). Cyberdemocracy: Internet and the public sphere. In D. Porter (Ed.), Internet
      culture (pp. 202–214). London: Routledge.
     Qiu, L. (2009W). rking-class network society: Communication technology and the information

      have-less in urban China. Cambridge, MA: The MIT press.
     Rheingold, H. (1994T)h.e virtual community. New York: Harper.
   Schuurman, N. (2004). Databases and bodies – A cyborg update.Environment and Planning A, 36,
      1337–1340.

     Scott, J. (198W).apons of the weak: Everyday forms of peasant resistance . New Haven: Yale
      University Press.
Sieber, R. (2000). GIS implementation in the grassroots.       Journal of Urban and Regional
      Information Systems Association, 12 (1), 15–29.

  Sieber, R. (2006). Public participation geographic information systems: A literature review and
      framework. Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 96 (3), 491–507.
 Staeheli, L. (2010). Political geography: Where’s citizenship?  Progress in Human Geography,
      35 (3), 393–400.

  Sui, D. (2006). The Streisand lawsuit and your stolen geography. GeoWorld, (December Issue),
      26–29.
  Sui, D. (2008). The wikiﬁcation of GIS and its consequences: Or Angelina Jolie’s new tattoo and
      the future of GIS. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 32 , 1–5.

  Sui, D., & Goodchild, M. (2003). A tetradic analysis of GIS and society using McLuhan’s law of
      the media. The Canadian Geographer, 47 (1), 5–17.
     Tai, Z. (200T)h.e internet in China: Cyberspace and civil society. New York: Routledge.
 6   When Web 2.0 Meets Public Participation GIS (PPGIS): VGI and Spaces…                     103


    Thompson, J. (1995 T)h.e media and modernity: A social theory of the media. Cambridge: Polity

     Press.
 Tulloch, D. (2007). Many, many maps: Empowerment and online participatory mapping.          First
     Monday ,       12 (2).      http:// ﬁ rstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/
     view/1620/1535. Accessed November 15, 2011.

  Tulloch, D. (2008). Is VGI participation? From vernal pools to video games. eoJournal, 72 (3–4),
     161–171.
 Warf, B. (2011). Geographies of global Internet censorship. GeoJournal, 76 (1), 1–23.
Weiner, D., & Harris, T. (2003). Community-integrated GIS for land reform in South Africa.

     URISA Journal, 15 , 61–73.
 Williams, S. (2007). Application for GIS specialist meeting. http://www.ncgia.ucsb.edu/projects/
     vgi/participants.html Accessed January 28, 2011.
  Wilson, M. (2009). Coding community. Unpublished PhD dissertation, Department of Geography,

     University of Washington.
  Woo, M. (2002). Law and gendered citizen. In M. Goldman & E. Perry (Eds.)C  , hanging meanings
     of citizenship in modern China (pp. 308–329). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
  Xiao, S. (2010). Paying attention is power, Onlooking to change China. News editorial fouthern

     Weekend. January 13, 2010.  http://www.infzm.com/content/40097. Accessed July 29, 2011.
 Yang, G. (2003). Weaving a green web: The internet and environmental activism in China. China
     Environment Series, Issue 6.     http://bc.barnard.columbia.edu/~gyang/Yang_GreenWeb.pdf.
     Accessed November 15, 2011.

    Yang, G. (200T9)h.e power of the internet in China: Citizen activism online. New York: Columbia
     University Press.
Zook, M., & Graham, M. (2007). The creative reconstruction of the Internet: Google and the
     privatization of cyberspace and DigiPlace. Geoforum, 38 , 1322–1343.
   Chapter 7

Citizen Science and Volunteered Geographic

Information: Overview and Typology
of Participation



   Muki Haklay






 AbstraWctithin volunteered geographic information (VGI), citizen science
stands out as a class of activities that require special attention and analysis. Citizen
science is likely to be the longest running of VGI activities, with some projects

showing continuous effort over a century. In addition, many projects are character-
ised by a genuine element of volunteering and contribution of information for the
beneﬁt of human knowledge and science. They are also tasks where data quality and
uncertainty come to the fore when evaluating the validity of the results. This chapter
provides an overview of citizen science in the context of VGI – hence the focus on
geographic citizen science. This chapter highlights the historical context of citizen

science and its more recent incarnation. It also covers some of the cultural and
conceptual challenges that citizen science faces and the resulting limitation on the
level of engagement. By drawing parallels with the Participatory Geographic
Information Systems (PGIS) literature, the chapter offers a framework for participa-
tion in citizen science and concludes with the suggestion that a more participatory

mode of citizen science is possible.


       7.1     Introduction


Volunteered geographic information (VGI), coined by Goodchild( 2007 ) , encom-
passes a wide range of activities and practices, ranging from the ‘fun’ activities of
locating summer holiday photographs (Turner 2006)to focused surveying in the
aftermath of an earthquake (Zook et.010 ) . Withihese practices, thereis asubset

that falls into the category of citizen science – the involvement of non-professional



  M. Hakl*ay) (
Department of Civil, Environmental and Geomatic Engineering,
 University College London , London , UK
e-mail: m.haklay@ucl.ac.uk

D. Sui et al. (eds.), Crowdsourcing Geographic Knowledge: Volunteered Geographic
Information (VGI) in Theory and Practice, DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-4587-2_7,
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
106                                                                         M. Haklay


scientists in data collection and, to some extent, its analysis. While it is possible to
try to formulate a deﬁnition that delineates the boundaries of what should or should
not be considered citizen science, a much more fruitful approach is to understand
the general properties of citizen science and its overlap with VGI. As we shall see,

not all citizen science is geographic, that is, involving a project in which a location
on Earth plays an important role. Once the differentiation between the geographic
and non-geographic projects is clariﬁed, we can focus on the former, as they include
an element of VGI, by necessity.
   Before turning to citizen science itself, it is worth noticing, in the context of this

book, how the different contextualisation of VGI illuminates aspects that might go
unnoticed or unexplored otherwise. Thus, VGI can be seen as a way of producing
geographical information and as a tool for updating national geographical databases
(Goodchild   2007; Antoniou et al. 2010) in which case the appropriate context
is spatial data quality and the production of geographical information. When it is
viewed within the context of critical, participatory or feminist Geographic

Information Systems (GIS) (Elwood        2008), questions about the nature of the
participation, power relations and other societal aspects of VGI are opened – thus,
the process of creating VGI is becoming as important as analysing the product.
When Budhathoki et al.( 2010)look at the reasons for participation in leisure,
volunteering and contribution to open source projects in the context of VGI, they

highlight that the behaviour of participants and the reasons that lead to their involve-
ment are important elements of VGI. Other interpretations and contextualisation of
VGI provide their own lens onto the activities of participants and the resulting
products. Because VGI is an area that requires a socio-technical analysis, these
prisms are valuable in helping to understand the phenomena and to consider the

relevant applications of its products. The use of citizen science provides another
such prism, highlighting how VGI operateswithin scienti ﬁk    cnowledge production.
   In the current chapter, we start with an overview of the ﬁeld and its changes in
the past decade following the growth of the Internet in general, and the World Wide
Web (Web) in particular, as a global communication platform. Next, the enabling

factors and trends are brieﬂy outlined and explained. Following this review, the
characteristics of geographic citizen science are reviwed based on currentevidence.
We then discuss the intriguing cultural challenge to existing scientiﬁc practices
that citizen science puts forward. Finally, by drawing on established practices in
participatory GIS, a framework for participation in citizen science is offered and its
implications are analysed.




   7.2      Citizen Science


As noted before, while the aim here is not to provide a precise deﬁnition of citizen
science with rigid boundaries, a deﬁnition andclari ﬁ cation otfhe corecharacteristics
of citizen science is needed. We deﬁne citizen science here as scientiﬁc activities in
which non-professional scientists voluntarily participate in data collection, analysis
and dissemination of a scientiﬁc project (Cohn2008; Silvertown2009 ) . People who
7  Citizen Science and Volunteered Geographic Information: Overview…                 107


participate in a scientiﬁc study without playing some part in the study itself – for
example, volunteering in a medical trial or participating in a social science survey –
are not included in this deﬁnition. At the same time, the core issue of ‘who is a

scientist’ is left deliberately blurred. This is becaut is easier toidentify professional
scientists as those that are employed to carry out scientiﬁc work or investitgioan. With
unpaid scientists, the situation is more complex – many will not deﬁne or identify
themselves as scientists even if they are carrying out signiﬁcant work within the
scientiﬁc frameworks of data collection and interpretation. Others will use the

qualiﬁcation of amateur scientist to describe themselves, or a similar deﬁnition such
as bird watcher. However, for our purposes, scientists are all the active participants
in a scientiﬁc project.
   It is important to notice that there are boundaries, albeit fuzzy, of what should be
considered a citizen science project. While it is easy to identify a citizen science

project when the aim of the project is the collection of scientiﬁc information, as in
the recording of the distribution of plant species, there are cases where the deﬁnition
is less clear-cut. For example, the process of data collection in OpenStreetMap or
Google Map Maker is mostly focused on recording veriﬁable facts about the world
that can be observed on the ground. The tools used by OpenStreetMap mappers –

such as remotely sensed images, GPS receivers and map editing software – are
scientiﬁc instruments. With their attempt to locate observed objects and record them
on a map accurately, they follow in the footsteps of surveyors who followed scientiﬁc
principles in their work such as Robert Hooke, who carried out an extensive survey
of London following theﬁre of 1666 using scientiﬁc methods (though, unlike

OpenStreetMap volunteers, Hooke was paid for his effort). Finally, cases where
facts are collected in a participatory mapping activity, such as the one that Ghose
 (001) describes, should probably be considered citizen science only if the partici-
pants decided to frame it as such. The framing of the activity is important because

in citizen science the expectations are that the data collection will follow a certain
protocol and that data analysis and visualisation will be carried out according to
established practices. Under a citizen science framing, the activity will focus on
recording observations rather than highlighting community views or opinions.
   Notice also that, by deﬁnition, citizen science can only exist in a world in which

science is socially constructed as the preserve of professional scientists in academic
institutions and industry because, otherwise, any person who is involved in a
scientiﬁc project would simply be considered a contributor and, potentially, a sctiie st.
As Silvertown(2009)noted, until the late nineteenth century, science was mainly
developed by people who had additional sources of employment that allowed them

to spend time on data collection and analysis. Famously, Charles Darwin joined the
Beaglevoyage, not as a professional naturalist but as a companion to Captain
FitzRoy. Thus, in that era, almost all science was citizen science albeit mostly by
afﬂuent gentlemen and gentlewomen scientists. While the ﬁrst professional scientist
is likely to be Robert Hooke, who was paid to work on scientiﬁc studies in the

seventeenth century, the major growth in the professionalisation of scientists was
mostly in the latter part of the nineteenth and throughout the twentieth century.
   Even with the rise of the professional scientist, the role of volunteers has not dis-
appeared, especially in areas such as archaeology, where it is common for enthusiasts
108                                                                         M. Haklay















































 Fig. 7.1ritish Trust of Ornithology listing of potential engagement projects and level of
engagement



to join excavations, or in natural science and ecology, where non-professionals
collect and send samples and observations to national repositories. These activities

include the Christmas Bird Watch that has been ongoing since 1900 and the British
Trust for Ornithology Survey, which has collected over 31 million records since its
establishment in 1932 (Silvertown2009) – see Fig.7.1. Astronomy is another area in
which amateurs and volunteers have been oa  npar with professionals when  observation
7  Citizen Science and Volunteered Geographic Information: Overview…             109


of the night sky and the identiﬁcation of galaxies, comets and asteroids are considered
(BBC 2006  ). Finally, meteorological observations have also relied on volunteers
since the early start of systematic measurements of temperature, precipitation or

extreme weather events (WMO     2001 ) .
   This type of citizen science provides the ﬁrst class of ‘classic’ citizen science –
the ‘persistence’ parts of science where the resources, geographical spread and the
nature of the problem mean that volunteers sometimes predatethe professionalisation
and mechanisation of science. There activities usually require a large but sparse

network of observers who work as part of a hobby or leisure activity. This type of
citizen science hasﬂourished in speciﬁc enclaves of scientiﬁc practice, and the
progressive development of modern communication tools has made the process of
collating the results from the participants easier and cheaper while keeping many of
the characteristics of data collection processes close to their origins.

   A second type of citizen science activity is environmental management within
the context of environmental justicecampaigns. Modern environmental management
includes strong technocratic- and scientiﬁc-oriented management practices (Bryant
and Wilson 1998; Scott and Barnett 2009) and environmental decision making
is heavily based on scientiﬁc environmental information. As a result, when an envi-

ronmental conﬂict emerges – such as community protest over a noisy local factory
or planned expansion of an airport – the valid evidence needs to be based on scientiﬁc
data collection. This aspect of environmental justice struggle is encouraging
communities to carry out ‘community science’ in which scientiﬁc measurements
and analysis are carried out by members of local communities so they can develop an

evidence base and set action plans to deal with problems in their area. A successful
example of such an approach is the ‘Global Community Monitor’ method for allio   nwg
communities to deal with air pollution issues (Scott and Barnett2009 ) . Air pollution
issues are diagnosed with a simple method of sampling air using plastic buckets

followed by analysis in an air pollution laboratory before, ﬁnally, the community is
provided with instructions on how to understand the results. This activity is termed
‘Bucket Brigade’ and was used acrossthe world in environmental justicecampaigns.
Similarly, in London, community science was used to collect noise readings in two
communities that are impacted by airport and industrial activities. The outputs were

effective in bringing environmental problems to the attention of decision makers
and regulatory authorities (Haklay et al. 2008a). As in ‘classic’ citizen science, the
growth in electronic communication enabled communities to identify potential
methods – for example, through the ‘Global Community Monitor’ website – as well
as ﬁnd the details of international standards, regulations and scientiﬁc papers that

can be used together with the local evidence.
   However, the emergence of the Internet and the Web as a global infrastructure
has enabled a new incarnation of citizen science, which has been termed ‘citizen
cyberscience’ by Francois Grey(    2009 ) . As Silvertown  200(9 ) and Cohn   200(8 )
noted, the realisation by scientists that the public can provide free labour, skills,

computing power and even funding and the growing demands from research funders
for public engagement have motivated the development and launch of new and
innovative projects. These projects utilise personal computers, GPS receivers and
110                                                                         M. Haklay


mobile phones as scientiﬁc instruments. Within citizen cyberscience, it is possible
to identify three subcategories: volunteered computing, volunteered thinking and
participatory sensing.

   Volunteered computing wasﬁrst developed in 1999, with the foundation of
SETI@home (Anderson et al. 2002), which was designed to distribute the analysis
of data that was collected from a radio telescope in the search for extraterrestrial
intelligence. The project utilises the unused processingapacity that existsin personal
computers and uses the Internet to send and rece vie ‘work packages’that areanalysed

automatically and sent back to the main server. Over 3.83 million downloads were
registered on the project’s website by July 2002. The system on which SETI@
home is based, the Berkeley Open Infrastructure for Network Computing (BOINC),
is now used for over 100 projects, covering physics, processing data from the Large
Hadron Collider through LHC@home; climate science with the running of climate

models in climateprediction.net; and biology in which the shape of proteins is
calculated in Rosetta@home.
   While volunteered computing requires very little from the participants, apart
from installing software on their computers, in volunteered thinking the volunteers
are engaged at a more active and cognitive level (Grey     2009 ) . In these projects,

the participants are asked to use a website in which information or an image is
presented to them. When they register onto the system, they are trained in the task
of classifying the information. After the training, they are exposed to information
that has not been analysed and are asked to carry out classiﬁcation work. The
Stardust@home project (Westphal et al. 2006), in which volunteers were asked to

use a virtual microscope to try to identify traces of interstellar dust, was one of the
ﬁrst projects in this area, together with the NASA ClickWorkers that focused on the
classiﬁcation of craters on Mars. Galaxy Zoo (Lintott et al.2008), a project in which
volunteers classify galaxies, is now one of the most developed ones, with over

100,000 participants and with a range of applications that are included in the wider
Zooniverse set of projects (see http://www.zooniverse.org/).
   Participatory sensing is the ﬁnal and most recent type of citizen science activity.
Here, the capabilities of mobile phones are used to sense the environment. Some
mobile phones have up to nine sensors integrated into them, including different

transceivers (mobile network, WiFi, Bluetooth), FM and GPS receivers, camera,
accelerometer, digital compass and microphone. In addition, they can link to external
sensors. These capabilities are increasingly used in citizen science projects, such
as Mappiness in which participants are asked to provide behavioural information
(feeling of happiness) while the phone records their location to allow the linkage of

different locations to well-being (MacKerron 2011). Other activities include the
sensing of air quality (Cuff et al.2007) or noise levels in the application NoiseTube
(Maisonneuve et al. 2010)by using the mobile phone’s location and the readings
from the microphone.
   Before turning to the context and drivers of the currently resurgent citizen

science, it is worth noting that other typologies of citizen science are offered by
Cooper et al.( 2007 ) , Wilderman200   (7 ) , Bonney et a2   l.00(9 ) and Wiggins and
Crowston 2  (011). These classiﬁcations highlight aspects such as the level of informal
7  Citizen Science and Volunteered Geographic Information: Overview…               111


science education, the involvement of participants in various aspects of research
activity or the purpose of the project. This is expected in an emerging ﬁeld, where
similarly to VGI, researchers are scanning theﬁeld and suggesting ways to
understand the landscape.




   7.3      Context and Drivers


The general trends that ushered in the Web Mapping 2.0 era (Haklayet al. 2008b ;
Goodchild 2007) are also part of the drivers that allowed the recent growth in citizen
science in general and citizen cyberscience in particular. These factors include the
increased availability of higher-capacity domestic Internet connections and the
reducing costs of computers and sophisticated mobile devices; the reduced costs of
computer storage and the availability of xetra storage capacity onpersonal computers

that make it possible for participants to store and process large amounts of data
without major implications to their own activities; the continued development of
Internet technologies and standards such as eXtensible Markup Language (XML)
that facilitate the transfer of information between computers; the increased accuracy
of the Global Positioning System (GPS) since 2000 and the subsequent reduction in

cost of receivers; and the growth of sophisticated Web applications that enable rich
interaction by their users, allowing for applications such as the virtual microscope
that was used in Stardust@home.
   However, these general and mostly technological factors are only part of the
trends that led to the blossoming of citizen science. As important are the social

trends that enabled it. The main factor that needs to be considered is the growth in
the population of well-educated individuals, with many millions of people who have
advanced degrees or some level of higher education in science or engineering but do
not use their scientiﬁc knowledge in their daily life. Moreover, with the increase in
the demands of secondary education, many who have dropped out of school even

are equipped with basic scientiﬁc knowledge that is sufﬁcient to make them effective
participants in citizen science projects. For may of these people,education provided
a starting point for an interest in science, which sot ful ﬁ lled heir daily activities.
Thus, citizen science provides an opportunity toexplore this dormantinterest – while
the educational attainment means that the scientists who design the project can
assume a basic understanding of principles by the participants.

   To this, we should add the increase in leisure activities and the reduction in winrgk
hours that has occurred in many advanced economies over the past four decades.
Before the growth in electronic communication, hobbies were limited to private
activities or occasional gatherings of a small group of enthusiasts. The ability of the
Web to accommodate narrow interests and to allow a highly distributed network of

individuals to share and discuss their interests is especially important for such
activities. It allows for the creation of websites, mailing lists and other ways in
which these enthusiasts can come together and share experience or join forces
in working on scientiﬁc data collection or analysis.
112                                                                         M. Haklay


   Notice that together, the drivers point to an inherent bias in the socio-economic
make-up of citizen science. Participants are highly likely to be living in an advanced
economy and to be a member of the middle class, thus to have the education,
technical skills, access to resources and infrastructure that facilitates participation

in these activities.



   7.4      Geographical Citizen Science


Against the backdrop of general citizen science, we can identify a speciﬁc
subtype of activities that can be termed ‘Geographical Citizen Science’ and
therefore fall within the deﬁnition of VGI. Geographical citizen science includes
projects where the collection of location information is an integral part of the
activity. It should become clear from the overview above that a signiﬁcant part of

the information that was and iscollected through ‘classic’ citizen science, commn uity
science and citizen cyberscience projects is geographical – as in the location of
observations in the Christmas Bird Watch or the recording of noise along a given
route in NoiseTube (Maisonneuve et al. 2010). Yet, in the past, the location was
usually approximated and sometimes given in grid co-ordinates of only 100-m, or

even 1-km, accuracy, which meant that linking observations to a location could be
tricky and highly uncertain. Even though location technology is increasingly
available through Personal Navigation Devices (PND), GPS receivers and mobile
phones, it is important to remember that because of their affordance (in the sense
of familiarity and ease of use, as in Norman 1990), paper maps remain a very

effective medium for data col     lection. This has been shown in citizen science
studies in London as well as in the     integration of paper mapping activities in
OpenStreetMap through Walking Papers (Migurski          2009). As long as the data
collection media supports accurate geographic location, the project can result in
high-quality geographical citizen science.

    The ﬁrst important characteristic of geographical citizen science is to understand
the role of the volunteer. The role can be active or passive. An active contribution
happens when the participant is expected to consciously contribute to the observa-
tion or the analysis, as in the case of taking an image of an observed species, tagging
it and sending it electronically to the project’s hub. A passive data collection can
happen when the contributor is acting more as an observation platform and the data

are gathered without active engagement, for example, when a person volunteers to
be tagged by a GPS receiver to monitor daily walking activity or replaces a memory
card and batteries in an automatic digital camera that is installed on a deer track
(Cohn 2008). A further differentiation can be made between geographically explicit
and implicit citizen science projects (Antoniou et al.     2010 ) . In geographically

explicit projects, the activity is aimed at collecting geographical information – for
example, in the British Trust of Ornithology project a participant is required to
record a speciﬁc location of where the observation is taking place. In geographically
implicit projects, the aim might be to collect images of different species; some of
7  Citizen Science and Volunteered Geographic Information: Overview…              113


the images may arrive with location information (i.e. geotagged), but the aim of the
project is not to collect geographical information.
   These different schemes will have an impact on the need to motivate and engage
the participants and the level of training and knowledge that is required from them.

In addition, different schemes will inﬂuence the ability to secure quantitative and
qualitative information. While all forms can support the collection of some quanti-
tative information, only the active and geographically explicit projects are likely to
provide meaningful qualitative information such as descriptions of personal percep-
tions or textual descriptions of the place where the observation was recorded.

   Research into the motivation and the spatial characteristics of VGI (Budhathoki
et al.2010; Coleman et al.2009; Haklay 2010), as well as studies of Wikipedia and
citizen science projects (Nov et al. 2011), is providing some guidance on what it is
possible to achieve with geographical citizen science. What we know so far is that
citizen science is a ‘serious leisure’ activity and that the most likely participants
will join with some existing interest in the subject and will be keen to learn more.

They will be predominantly male, well educated and from higher income brackets,
which gives them both the time to participate in the activity and theﬁnancial
resources for specialist equipment and/or participation in ﬁeld work. There will be
‘participation inequality’ with some participants contributing a lot, while many
others contribute a little.

   The areas that can be covered well by geographical citizen science will be areas
with a high population concentration or high level of outdoor activity such as popular
national parks. Coverage of other areas requires special planning and creation of
suitable motivational schemes, including monetary ones, or reliance on a smaller
pool of volunteers. There will also be temporal aspects to data collection, with suer

months, weekends and daytime being the more popular times in which participants
engage in data collection activities.
   All these means that the data are essentially heterogeneous, and it is important to
remember that the data quality will vary according to the number of volunteers who
work on the data and the particular knowledge of each volunteer. Thus, the data

should not be treated as homogeneous and complete where a statement of quality
can refer to the whole assemblage; rather, localised measures must be used. While
all these aspects of geographical citizen science have an impact on the type of
research questions and scientiﬁc challenges that can be answered through utilisation
of suitable schemes, there is a potentially more signiﬁcant challenge hindering this
use of citizen science. At issue is more the contemporary culture of science than the

putative value of citizen science itself.



   7.5      Culture of Science Problems


The story of modern science is often told by highlighting the increased precision
and accuracy with which information is obtained and analysed (e.g. Bryson 2004 ) .
In experimental science, the instruments and devices were designed over the years
114                                                                         M. Haklay


to provide better accuracy, and complex experimental protocols were created to
ensure that the level of uncertainty associated with measurements was reduced.
   While it is well recognised that different academic disciplines have their own

culture and speciﬁc practices (Latour   1993), such as the practice of double-blind
studies in medicine but not in other areas that research human subjects, the issue
of dealing with uncertainty has been central to many areas of science, including
geographic information science (see Couclelis 2003 ) .
   Interestingly, the attempt to eliminate uncertainty is especially prevalent in areas

in which science is used in practical applications such as engineering or environ-
mental management. Due to organisational reasons and policy (King and Kraemer
1993), protocols are enshrined in regulations and become ‘the correct way of doing
science’ with rigid protocols, some parts of which are arbitrary.
   The strive to eradicate uncertainty (or at least reduce it) and the development of

complex protocols are at the heart of the cultural issue that is leading to suspicion,
derision and dismissal of citizen science as a valuable method of scientiﬁc data
collection. The mistrust of citizen science is, as noted in the opening, based on the
view that science is best left to scientists and that it requires rigour, knowledge and
skills that only professional scientists develop over time. As Silvertown2(009 ) noted,

‘The apparent underrepresentation of citizen science in the formal literature probably
has two causes. First, the term itself is relatively recent, and in fact hundreds of
scientiﬁc papers have resulted from the data collected in Christmas Bird Counts and
other long-running volunteer monitoring programmes. Second,         projects thatﬁt
uneasily into the standard model of hypothesis-testing research are written about

only in the grey literature, or even not at al’l(p. 471, emphasis added). This is also
highlighted in Holling (1998) who emphasised that there are two cultures of science
and that citizen science by necessity belongs to the type of science that incorporates
uncertainty and highlights integrative approaches. Interestingly, suspicion of VGI fol-

lows along the lines of what Holling identiﬁed in the area of ecology over a decade
ago. Despite the evidence that VGI can be as accurate as professional data (Haklay
2010; Girres and Touya 2010), mistrust of VGI as a useful source of geographical
information is common among professional users (e.g. Flanagin and Metzge2      r008 ) .
   What is forgotten by those who oppose citizen science is the development of

instrumentation and its impact on the balance of knowledge and skills that are
required by the operator, as well as the level of motivation, dedication and attention
to detail of volunteers. Scientiﬁc instrumentation has evolved tremendously over the
past 350 years if we take the invention of instruments such as Hooke’s microscope
in 1663 as an indication of the development of modern scientiﬁc instruments. Since

then, the instruments have improved enormously in terms of their observational
power, accuracy and precision. However, until fairly late in the twentieth century,
they demanded a signiﬁcant amount of theoretical and practical knowledge to
operate effectively. A great deal of professional judgement was required to balance
the accuracy of a calculation with the practical aspects of conducting research.

Consider, for example, that many calculations for NASA’s moon missions were
carried out with slide rules, where experience and judgement is necessary to decide
if the calculations are satisfactory.
7  Citizen Science and Volunteered Geographic Information: Overview…              115


   The computerisation and miniaturisation of scientiﬁc instruments, especially in
the past 20 years, have changed this equation. Now, the humble GPS receiver
encapsulates knowledge and procedures that are highly complex and is capable
of calculating them precisely without any intervention from the user. The GPS

satellites themselves also encapsulate signiﬁcant amounts of scientiﬁc knowledge
and understanding. For example, William Roy spent about 6 weeks and engaged a
team of 12 men to measure the 5-mile baseline of the English triangulation system
with an accuracy of 2.5 inches. Today, a single person, equipped with a good quality
GPS receiver and a mobile phone, can achieve a similar ﬁt in less than a day. The

sophistication of the equipment and, more importantly, the science that is integrated
into the computational parts of it enable this.
   The ability of equipment to provide accurate and precise measurement is central
to the ability of volunteers to provide reliable scientiﬁc information, especially
when these instruments are used in tandem with their personal knowledge and
commitment. For example, research in the USA has shown that citizen scientists

identiﬁed crab types correctly 95% of the time (Cohn    2008 ) . Importantly, the basic
understanding of scientiﬁc principles and methods, which are now routinely taught
at school level, means that the participants in the research have an understanding of
what is required of them and what is needed to take a reliable scientiﬁ c measurement.
What is more, because of this basic knowledge, they can carry out the observation

without supervision and with very little training. Citizen scientists show signiﬁcant
commitment to the topic and are as capable as the best researchers in many cases.
Thus, the information that they produce should be trusted.



   7.6      Geographical Citizen Science as Participatory Science


Against the technical, social and cultural background of citizen science, we offer a
framework that classiﬁes the level of participation and engagement of participants

in citizen science activity. While there is some similarity between Arnstein’s (1969 )
‘ladder of participation’ and this framework, there is also a signiﬁcant difference.
The main thrust in creating a spectrum of participation is to highlight the power
relationships that exist within social processes such as urban planning or in partici-
patory GIS use in decision making (Sieber2006). In citizen science, the relationship
exists in the form of the gap between professional scientists and the wider public.

This is especially true in environmental decision making where there are major gaps
between the public’s and the scientists’ perceptions of each other (Irwin  1995 ) .
   In the case of citizen science, the relationships are more complex, as many of the
participants respect and appreciate the knowledge of the professional scientists who
are leading the project and can explain how a speciﬁc piece of work ﬁts within the

wider scientiﬁc body of work. At the same time, as volunteers build their own
knowledge through engagement in the project, using the resources that are available
on the Web and through the speciﬁc project to improve their own understanding,
they are more likely to suggest questions and move up the ladder of participation.
116                                                                             M. Haklay


       Level 4 ‘Extreme Citizen Science’

        Collaborative science – problem definition, data collection and analysis


       Level 3 ‘Participatory science’

        Participation in problem definition and data collection

       Level 2 ‘Distributed Intelligence’

        Citizens as basic interpreters
        Volunteered thinking


       Level 1 ‘Crowdsourcing’

        Citizens as sensors
        Volunteered computing


 Fig. 7.2Levels of participation and engagement in citizen science projects




In some cases, the participants would want to volunteer in a passive way, as is the

case with volunteered computing, without full understanding of the project as a
way to engage and contribute to a scientiﬁc study. An example of this is the many
thousands of people who volunteered for the Climateprediction.net project, where
their computers were used to run global climate models. Many would like to feel

that they are engaged in one of the major scientiﬁc issues of the day, but would not
necessarily want to fully understand the science behind it.
   Therefore, unlike Arnstein’s ladder, there should not be a strong value judgement

on the position that a speciﬁc project takes. At the same time, there are likely beneﬁts
in terms of participants’ engagement and involvement in the project to try to move
to the highest level that is suitable for the speciﬁc project. Thus, we should see this
framework as a typology that focuses on the level of participation (Fig. 7.2 ).

   At the most basic level, participation is limited to the provision of resources, and
the cognitive engagement is minimal. Volunteered computing relies on many
participants that are engaged at this level, and following Howe ( 2006 ) , this can be

termed ‘crowdsourcing’. In participatory sensing, the implementation of a similar
level of engagement will have participants asked to carry sensors around and
bring them back to the experiment organiser. The advantage of this approach, from
the perspective of scientiﬁc framing, is that as long as the characteristics of the

instrumentation are known (e.g. the accuracy of a GPS receiver), the experiment
is controlled to some extent, and some assumptions about the quality of the infor-
mation can be used. At the same time, running projects at the crowdsourcing level
means that despite the willingness of the participants to engage with a scientiﬁc

project, their most valuable input – their cognitive ability – is wasted.
7  Citizen Science and Volunteered Geographic Information: Overview…                117


   The second level is ‘distributed intelligence’ in which the cognitive ability of the
participants is the resource that is being used. Galaxy Zoo and many of the ‘classic’
citizen science projects are working at this level. The participants are asked to take

some basic training andthen collect data or carry out a simple interpretation activity.
Usually, the training activity includes a test that provides the scientists with an
indication ofthe quality of the work that the participant can carry out. With this type of
engagement, there is a need to be aware of questions that volunteers will raise while
working on the project and how to support their learning beyond the initial training.

   The next level, which is especially relevant in ‘community science’ is a level
of participation in which the problem deﬁnition is set by the participants, and in
consultation with scientists and experts, a data collection method is devised.
The participants are then engaged in data collection, but require the assistance of
the experts in analysing and interpreting the results. This method is common in

environmental justice cases and goes towards Irwin’s( 1995)call to have science
that matches the needs of citizens. However, participatory science can occur in other
types of projects and activities – especially when considering the volunteers who
become experts in the data collection and analysis through their engagement.
In such cases, the participants can suggest new research questions that can be

explored with the data they have collected. The participants are not involved in
detailed analysis of the results of their effort – perhaps because of the level of
knowledge that is required to infer scientiﬁc conclusions from the data.
   Finally, collaborative science is a completely integrated activity, as it is in parts
of astronomy where professional and non-professional scientists are involved in

deciding on which scientiﬁc problems to work    on and the nature ofthe datacollection
so it is valid and answers the needs of scientiﬁc protocols while matching the
motivations and interests of the participants. The participants can choose their level
of engagement and can be potentially involved in the analysis and publication or

utilisation of results. This form of citizen science can be termed ‘extreme citizen
science’ and requires that scientists act as facilitators, in addition to their role as
experts. This mode of science also opens the possibility of citizen science without
professional scientists, in which the whole process is carried out by the participants
to achieve a speciﬁc goal.

   This typology of participation can be used across the range of citizen science
activities, and one project should not be classiﬁedonly in one category.For example,
in volunteer computing projects, most of the participants will be at the bottom level,
while participants that become committed to the project might move to the second
level and assist other volunteers when they encounter technical problems. Highly

committed participants might move to a higher level and communicate with the
scientist who coordinates the project to discuss theresults of the analysisand suggest
new research directions.
   This typology exposes how citizen science integrates and challenges the way in
which science discovers and produces knowledge. Questions about the way in which

knowledge is produced and truths are discovered are part of the epistemology of
science. As noted above, throughout the twentieth century, as science became
more specialised, it also became professionalised. While certain people were
118                                                                          M. Haklay


employed as scientists in government, industry and research institutes, the rest of the
population – even ifthey graduated from a top university with top marks in a scientiﬁc
discipline –were not regarded as scientists or as participants in the scientiﬁc endea-

vour unless they were employed professionally to do so. In rare cases and following
the tradition of ‘gentlemen/women scientists’,wealthy individuals could participate
in this work by becoming an ‘honorary fellow’, or afﬁliated with a research
institute, which,inherently, brought them into the fold. This separation of ‘scientists’
and the ‘public’ was justiﬁed by the need to access specialist equipment, knowledge

and other privileges such as a well-stocked library. It might be the case that the need
to maintain this separation is a third reason that practising scientists shy away from
explicitly mentioning the contribution of citizen scientists to their work in addition
to those identiﬁed by Silvertown (  2009 ) .
   However, like other knowledge professionals who operate in the public sphere,

such as medical experts or journalists, scientists need toadjust to a newenvironment
that is fostered by the Web. Recent changes in communication technologies, cb    oined
with the increased availability of open access information and the factors that were
noted above, mean that processes of knowledge production and dissemination are
opening up in many areas of social and cultural activities (Shirky2008 ) . Therefore,

some of the elitist aspects of scientiﬁ c practice are being challenged by citizen
science, such as the notion that only dedicated, full-time researchers can produce
scientiﬁc knowledge. For example, surely, it should be professional scientists who
can solve complex scientiﬁc problems such as long-standing protein-structure
prediction of viruses. Yet, this exact problem was recently solved through a collabo-

ration of scientists working with amateurs who were playing the computer game
Foldit (Khatib et al. 2011). Another aspect of the elitist view of science can be
witnessed in interaction between scientists and the public, where the assumption is
of unidirectional ‘transfer of knowledge’ from the expert to lay people. Of course,

as in the other areas mentioned above, it is a grave mistake to argue that experts are
unnecessary and can be replaced by amateurs, as Keen( 2007 ) eloquently argued.
Nor is it suggested that because of citizen science, the need for professionalised
science will diminish; in many citizen science projects, it seems that the participants
accept the difference in knowledge and expertise of the scientists who are involved

in these projects (Bonney et al. 2009). At the same time, scientists need to develop
respect towards those who help them beyond the realisation that they provide free
labour, which was noted above.
   Given this tension, the participation hierarchy can be seen to be moving from a
‘business as usual’ scientiﬁc epistemology at the bottom to a more egalitarian

approach to scientiﬁc knowledge production at the top. The bottom level, where the
participants are contributing resources without cognitive engagement, maintains
the hierarchical division of scientists and the public. The public is volunteering its
time or resources to help scientists, while the scientists explain the work that is to be
done but without expectation that any participant will contribute intellectually to the

project. Arguably, even at this level, the scientists will be challenged by questions
and suggestions from the participants, and if they do not respond to them in a sensitive
manner, they will risk alienating participants. Intermediaries such as the IBM World
 7  Citizen Science and Volunteered Geographic Information: Overview…              119


 Community Grid, where a dedicated team is in touch with scientists who want to
 run projects as well as a community of volunteered computing providers, are cases
 of ‘outsourcing’ the community management and thus allowing, to an extent, the
 maintenance of the separation of scientists and the public.

    As we move up the ladder to a higher level of participation, the need for direct
 engagement between the scientist and the public increases. At the highest level, the
 participants are assumed to be on equal footing with the scientists in terms of
 scientiﬁc knowledge production. This requires a different epistemological under-
 standing of the process, in which it is accepted that the production of scientiﬁc

 insights is open to any participant while maintaining scientiﬁc standards and
 practices such as systematic observations or rigorous statistical analysis to verify
 that the results are signiﬁcant. The belief that, given suitable tools, many lay people
 are capable of such endeavours is challenging to some scientists who view their
 skills as unique. As the case of the computer game that helped in the discovery of
 new protein formations (Khatib et al.   2011)demonstrated, such collaboration can

 be fruitful even in cutting-edge areas of science. However, it can be expected that
 the more mundane and applied areas of science will lend themselves more easily to
 the fuller sense of collaborative science in which participants and scientists identify
 problems and develop solutions together. This is because the level of knowledge
 required in cutting-edge areas of science is so demanding.

   Another aspect in which the ‘extreme’ level challenges scientiﬁc culture is that it
 requires scientists to become citizen scientists in the sense that Irwin1(995 ) , Wilsdon
 et al.( 2005 ) and Stilgo2 e00(9)advocated. In this interpretation of the phrase, the
 emphasis is not on the citizen as a scientist, but on the scientist as a citizen. It requires
 scientists to engage with the social and ethical aspects of their work at a very deep level.

 Stilgoe 2(009, p. 7) suggested that, in some cases, it will not be possible to draw the
 line between the professional scientiﬁc activities, the responsibilities towards society
 and a fuller consideration of how a scientiﬁc project integrates with wider ethical
 and societalconcerns. However, as all these authors noted, this way of conceptualising
 and practising science is not widely accepted in the current culture of science.

   Therefore, we can conclude that this form of participatory and collaborative
 science will be challenging in many areas of science. This will not be because of
 technical or intellectual difﬁculties but mostly because of the cultural aspects that
 were mentioned throughout this chapter. This mightend up being themost important
 outcome of citizen science as a whole, as it might eventually catalyse the education
 of scientists to engage more fully with society.




   7.7       Conclusions


Geographical citizen science has clearly grown in recent years and is showing
 signiﬁcant potential in areas such as biodiversity, air pollution or recording the changing
 shapes of cities. There are, however, two issues that are critical when considering the
 research directions that link VGI, participatory GIS and citizen science.
  120                                                                              M. Haklay


     First and foremost, there is a need to consider which scientiﬁc questions can be
  answered by citizen science according to the patterns of data collection, the ability

  to recruit and train volunteers, the suitable participation level and other aspects of
  VGI. Second, there is a need to overcome the cultural issues and to develop an
  understanding and acceptance of citizen science within the scientiﬁc community.

  This will require challenging some of the deeply held views in science, such as
  viewing uncertainty not as something thatcan be eliminated throughtighter protocols
  but as an integral part of any data collection and therefore developing appropriate

  methods to deal with it during analysis. Moreover, the view of science as separate
  from societal and ethical concerns is also a challenge – especially at higher levels of

  engagement between scientists and participants.
     One intriguing possibility is that citizen science will work as an integral
  part of participatory science in which the whole scientiﬁc process is performed in

  collaboration with the wider public. Some examples are already emerging in geog-
  raphy (Pain  2004) and might provide direction for the future development of citizen
  science projects.


   AcknowledgementThis chapter was written with the support of the ‘Extreme’ Citizen Science –
  ExCiteS grant, funded by the EPSRC (Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council),
  EPSRC reference EP/I025278/1 and the EveryAware project, funded by the EC FP7. Special

  thanks go to the participants of the VGI workshops in GIScience 2010, AAG 2011, Vespucci
  Summer Institute 2011 and members of the ExCiteS group for their comments and questions.




    References


 Anderson, D. P., Cobb, J., Korpela, E., Lebofsky, M., & Werthimer, D. (2002). SETI@home:
     An experiment in public-resource computing. Communications of the ACM, 45 (11), 56–61.
 Antoniou, B., Haklay, M., & Morley, J. (2010). Web 2.0 geotagged photos: Assessing the spatial
     dimension of the phenomenon.Geomatica, The Journal of Geospatial Information, Technology
     and Practice, 64 (1), 99–110.
Arnstein, S. R. (1969). A ladder of citizen participation. Journal of the America Institute of

     Planners, 35 (4), 216–224.
   BBC (200.6C) itizen science, Radio 4 series.tp://www.bbc.co.uk/radio4/science/citizenscience.
     shtml. Accessed June 2011.
 Bonney, R., Ballard, H., Jordan, H., McCallie, E., Phillips, T., Shirk, J., & Wilderman, C. (2009).
     Public participation in scientiﬁc research: Deﬁning theﬁeld and assessing its potential for
     informal science education. In A CAISE Inquiry Group Report , Center for Advancement of
     Informal Science Education (CAISE), Washington, DC (Technical Report).

  Bryant, R. L., & Wilson, G. A. (1998). Rethinking environmental managementP.rogress in Human
     Geography, 22 (3), 321–343.
    Bryson, B. (2004A).short history of almost everything. London: Black Swan.
 Budhathoki, N. R., Nedovic-Budic, Z., & Bruce, B. (2010). An interdisciplinary frame for under-
     standing volunteered geographic informatio. eomatica, The Journalof GeospatialInformation,
     Technology and Practice, 64 (1), 11–26.
  Cohn, J. P. (2008). Citizen science: Can volunteers do real research? Bioscience, 58 (3), 192–197.

 Coleman, D. J., Georgiadou, Y., & Labonte, J. (2009). Volunteered geographic information: The
     nature and motivation of producers. International Journal of Spatial Data Infrastructures
     Research, 4 , 332–358.
    7  Citizen Science and Volunteered Geographic Information: Overview…                         121


   Cooper, C. B., Dickinson, J., Phillips, T., & Bonney, R. (2007). Citizen science as a tool for

       conservation in residential ecosystems.cology and Society 1(22), 11.tp://www.ecologyansociety.
       org/vol12/iss2/art11/. Accessed January 5, 2012.
   Couclelis, H. (2003). The certainty of uncertainty: GIS and the limits of geographic knowledge.
       Transactions in GIS, 7 (2), 165–175.

    Cuff, D., Hansen, M., & Kang, J. (2007). Urban sensing: Out of the woodsC . ommunications of the
       Association for Computing Machinery, 51 (3), 24–33.
   Elwood, S. (2008). Volunteered Geographic Information: Future research directions motivated by
       critical, participatory, and feminist GIS. GeoJournal, 72 (3–4), 173–183.

   Flanagin, A. J., & Metzger, M. J. (2008). The credibility of volunteered geographic information.
       GeoJournal, 72 (3–4), 137–148.
   Ghose, R. (2001). Use of information technology for community empowerment: Transforming
       geographic information systems into community information systems.       Transactions in GIS,

       5 (2), 141–163.
  Girres, J.-F., & Touya, G. (2010). Quality assessment of the French OpenStreetMap dataset.
       Transactions in GIS, 14 (4), 435–459.
   Goodchild, M. (2007). Citizens as sensors: The world of volunteered geography. GeoJournal, 69 ,

       211–221.
    Grey, F. (2009). The age of citizen cyberscience, CERN Courier, April 29, 2009. http://cerncourier.
       com/cws/article/cern/38718  . Accessed July 2011.
Haklay, M. (2010). How good is OpenStreetMap information? A comparative study of

       OpenStreetMap and Ordnance Survey datasets for London and the rest of EnglandE.nvironment
       and Planning B, 37 , 682–703.
    Haklay, M., Francis, L., & Whitaker, C. (2008a). Citizens tackle noise pollution.GIS Professional ,
       August issue.

   Haklay, M., Singleton, A., & Parker, C. (2008b). Web mapping 2.0: The Neogeography of the
       Geoweb. Geography Compass, 3 , 2011–2039.
    Holling, C. S. (1998). Two cultures of ecology. onservation Ecology 2(2), 4.http://www.consecol.
       org/vol2/iss2/art4/ Accessed January 5, 2012.

    Howe, J. (2006). The rise of crowdsourcing. Wired Magazine, June 2006.
      Irwin, A. (1995C)i.tizen science. London: Routledge.
      Keen, A. (2007 T)h.e cult of the amateur: How blogs, MySpace, YouTube, and the rest of today’s
       user-generated media are destroying our economy, our culture, and our values (1st ed.). New

       York: Doubleday.
  Khatib, F., DiMaio, F., Foldit Contenders Group, Foldit Void Crushers Group, Cooper, S.,
       Kazmierczyk, M., Gilski, M., Krzywda, S., Zabranska, H., Pichova, I., Thompson, J., Popovic,
       Z., Jaskolski, M., & Baker, D. (2011). Crystal structure of a monomeric retroviral protease

       solved by protein folding game players. Nature Structural & Molecular Biology . Published
       online September 18, 2011. doi:  10.1038/nsmb.2119.
    King, J. L., & Kraemer, L. K. (1993). Models, facts, and the policy process: The political ecology
       of estimated truth. In M. F. Goodchild, B. O. Parks, & L. T. Steyaert (Eds.),  Environmental

       modeling with GIS (pp. 353–360). New York: Oxford University Press.
      Latour, B. (1993W). have never been modern. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
  Lintott, C. J., Schawinski, K., Slosar, A., Land, K., Bamford, S., Thomas, D., Raddick, M. J.,
       Nichol, R. C., Szalay, A., Andreescu, D., Murray, P., & van den Berg, J. (2008). Galaxy zoo:

       Morphologies derived from visual inspection of galaxies from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey.
       Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 389 (3), 1179–1189.
 MacKerron, G. (2011). mappiness.org.uk. In          LSE Research Day 2011: The Early Career
       Researcher, May 26, 2011, London School of Economics and Political Science, London, UK

       (Unpublished).
    Maisonneuve, N., Stevens, M., & Ochab, B. (2010). Participatory noise pollution monitoring using
       mobile phones. Information Polity, 15 (1–2), 51–71.
    Migurski, M. (2009). Walking papers. walking-papers.org. Accessed 5 January 2012.
      Norman, D. A. (199T0h).e design of everyday things. New York: Doubleday.
 122                                                                                    M. Haklay


 Nov, O., Arazy, O., & Anderson, D. (2011). Technology-mediated citizen science participation:

     A motivational model. In Proceedings of the AAAI International Conference on Weblogs and
     Social Media (ICWSM 2011), Barcelona, Spain, July 2011.
 Pain, R. (2004). Social geography: Participatory research. Progress in Human Geography, 28 (5),
     652–663.

  Scott, D., & Barnett, C. (2009). Something in the air: Civic science and contentious environmental
     politics in post-apartheid South Africa. Geoforum, 40 (3), 373–382.
    Shirky, C. (2008 H.re comes everybody: The power of organizing without organizations . New
     York: Penguin Press.

 Sieber, R. (2006). Public participation and geographic information systems: A literature review
     and framework. Annals of the American Association of Geographers, 96 (3), 491–507.
Silvertown, J. (2009). A new dawn for citizen science.     Trends in Ecology & Evolution, 24 (9),
     467–471.

    Stilgoe, J. (200C)i.tizen scientists – Reconnecting science with civil society. London: Demos.
    Turner, A. J. (200In)t.roduction to neogeography. Sebastopol: O’Reilly Media, Inc.
Westphal, A. J., von Korff, J., Anderson, D. P., Alexander, A., Betts, B., Brownlee, D. E.,
     Butterworth, A. L., Craig, N., Gainsforth, Z., Mendez, B., See, T., Snead, C. J., Srama, R.,

     Tsitrin, S., Warren, J., & Zolensky, M. (2006). Stardust@home: Virtual microscope validation
     and ﬁrst results. In37th Annual Lunar and Planetary Science Conference, League City, Texas,
     March 2006, Abstract no. 2225.
  Wiggins, A., & Crowston, K. (2011). From conservation to Crowdsourcing: A typology of citizen

     science. InProceedings of the Forty-fourth Hawaii International Conference on System Science
     (HICSS-44), Koloa, HI, January 2011.
 Wilderman, C. C. (2007). Models of community science: Design lessons from the ﬁeld. In
     C. McEver, R. Bonney, J. Dickinson, S. Kelling, K. Rosenberg, & J. L. Shirk (Eds.),    Citizen

     science toolkit conference. Ithaca: Cornell Laboratory of Ornithology.
 Wilsdon, J., Wynne, B., & Stilgoe, J. (2005).  The public value of science or how to ensure that
     science really matters. London: Demos.
    World Meteorological Organisation. (200V   1o).lunteers for weather, climate and water . Geneva:

     World Meteorological Organisation. WMO No. 919.
  Zook, M., Graham, M., Shelton, T., & Gorman, S. (2010). Volunteered geographic information and
     crowdsourcing disaster relief: A case study of the Haitian earthquake.World Medical & Health
     Policy, 2 (2). doi:.2202/1948–4682.1069.
                              Part II
Geographic Knowledge Production
              and Place Inference
   Chapter 8

Volunteered Geographic Information and

Computational Geography: New Perspectives


    Bin Jiang








 AbstractVolunteered geographic information (VGI), one of the most important

types of user-generated web content, has been emerging as a new phenomenon. VGI
is contributed by numerous volunteers and supported by web 2.0 technologies. This
chapter discusses how VGI provides new perspectives for computational geogra-
phy, a transformed geography based on the use of data-intensive computing and
simulations to uncover the underlying mechanisms behind geographic forms and

processes. We provide several examples of computational geography using
OpenStreetMap data and GPS traces to investigate the scaling of geographic space
and its implications for human mobility patterns. We illustrate that the ﬁeld of geog-
raphy is experiencing a dramatic change and that geoinformatics and computational
geography deserve to be clearly distinguished, with the former being a study of

engineering and the latter being a science.



   8.1      Introduction


Theﬁeld of geographic information science (GIScience) is currently beneﬁting
from the increasing availability of massive amounts of volunteered geographic
information (VGI) (Goodchild 2007; Sui 2008)contributed by individuals in the
form of user-generated content supported by Web 2.0 technologies. The emergence
of VGI represents something of a paradigm shift in terms of geographic data acqui-

sition from the conventional top-down approach, mainly dominated by national
mapping agencies, to the bottom-up approach, in which data are contributed by
individual volunteers through crowdsourcing—a massive collective of amateurs



  B. Jiang) (
  Division of Geomatics , University of Gävle , Gävle , Sweden
e-mail: bin.jiang@hig.se


D. Sui et al. (eds.), Crowdsourcing Geographic Knowledge: Volunteered Geographic
Information (VGI) in Theory and Practice, DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-4587-2_8,
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
126                                                                           B. Jiang


performing functions that were previously performed by trained professionals
(Howe 2009). Massive amounts of VGI of various types and the computations
performed with these data constitute a signiﬁcant part of eScience or data-intensive

computing, which is being characterized as the fourth paradigm in scientiﬁc discov-
ery (Hey et al. 2009). Among many others, OpenStreetMap (OSM) is one of the
most successful examples of VGI.
   OSM is a wiki-like collaboration, or a grassroots movement, that provides an
editable map of the world using data from portable GPS devices, aerial photogra-

phy, and other free sources (Bennett 2010). Currently, there are more than 400,000
registered OSM contributors or users, and this number has been growing exponen-
tially in the past few years. OSM is not owned by anyone, which is both amazing
and unprecedented. For the ﬁrst time in human history, researchers can obtain street
data of the entire world for analysis and computation. This analysis and computa-

tion can provide deep analytical insights into cities and our environments for sus-
tainable development. This opportunity is signiﬁcant and is very different from
what is possible with Google Maps. Google Maps allows mashups, but its licensed
and copyrighted data prevent us from obtaining analytical insights. We cannot learn
how cities or regions have been sprawling outward by exploring only Google Maps.

Instead, we need to perform analysis and computation to quantify the level of urban
sprawl. In this regard, OSM, in addition to Google Maps, provides a rich data source
for researchers (free of charge) to use to better understand our cities and environ-
ments through advanced spatial analysis and computing. This understanding can
further be used for spatial planning, for example, redeveloping parts of a city or

restricting further development of some parts of a country. In other words, OSM
data can be analyzed to obtain knowledge in various forms of patterns, structures,
relationships, and rules for spatial decision making. For instance, how is urban
sprawl related to economic activities, population density, and public health issues

such as obesity?
   This chapter will discuss how geospatial analysis and computation of OSM data
will lead to some hidden and surprising ﬁndings about the structures and patterns of
geographic space. Our discussion is based on the assumption that OSM data, or VGI
in general, are good enough to be used for computing and analysis. Although there

are quality issues with VGI, this does not prevent us from uncovering hidden or
surprising patterns about cities, environments, and human activities. The accumtuiolan
of evidence, as well as Linus’ law—“given enough eyeballs, all bugs are shallow”
( Raymond2001, p. 30)—indicates that the quality of OSM data matches that of the
data provided by mapping agencies, mirroring the results of studies (Giles     2005 )

on other user-generated content such as Wikipedia.
   This chapter will brieﬂy review computational geography and its evolution
along with other related notions emerging in theﬁeld of geographic information
systems (GIS). We provide a new deﬁnition of computational geography, and we
differentiate it from geoinformatics. We then present some exemplars of computa-

tional geography that rely on OSM data to uncover the underlying structures and
patterns of earth surface processes. This chapter concludes with a few remarks on
future research.
8  Volunteered Geographic Information and Computational Geography…            127


   8.2     What Is Computational Geography?


The notion of computational geography ﬁrst appeared in 1994, when the Centre for
Computational Geography was established as an interdisciplinary initiative at the
University of Leeds. Two years later, in 1996, an international conference series on
computational geography (geocomputation) was established. This conference has

since been held more than ten times. As reﬂected in the literature, geocomputation
has apparently become a favored term, even though geocomputation and compu-
tational geography refer to the same scientiﬁc undertakings and have been used
interchangeably.
   What is computational geography? This question has been intensively studied
and hotly debated in the GIS/geocomputation community (e.g., Longley et al. 1998 ;

Gahegan1999; Ehlen et al.2002). The same question has been answered and exa  imed
by various scholars on numerous occasions. To summarize, there are three basic
views that were put forward by early pioneers on what computational geography is.
The ﬁrst view, mainly held by Stan Openshaw ( 2000 ) and Mark Gahega1n99(      9 ) ,
recognizes the impact of increasing computing power and complex computational

methods on geography or on geosciences in general. This view stresses dealing with
unsolvable geographic problems using, for example, high-performance computing,
artiﬁcial intelligence, data mining, and visualization.The second viewis more con-
cerned with the science of geography in a computationally intensive environment
and expects geocomputation to offer a means of explaining geographic phenomena.

This view is mainly held by Helen Couclelis( 1998 ) and Bill Macmilla1      n998 ) .
Paul Longley and his associates, such as Mike Goodchild (Longley et al.    2001 ) ,
hold the third view that geocomputation is synonymous with GIScience, the science
behind GIS technologies, which deals with fundamental questions raised by the use
of geographic information and technologies.
   The emergence of computational geography occurred at a time when GIS/geoin-

formatics as a tool underwent rapid development after a few decades of evolution
and applications. Many GIS pioneers had started to think of certain fundamental
issues surrounding the development of GIS. Along with computational geography,
the widely recognized terms of GIScience (Goodchild1992 ) and spatial information
theory (Frank et al. 1992) appeared at almost the same time in the 1990s. It is no

wonder that many GIS researchers see an overlap between GIS, geoinformatics,
geomatics, GIScience, and spatial information theory. The coemergence of these
terms is a clear indicator that this ﬁeldhas been under rapid development and evolu-
tion. Every term tried to capture some essential part of the development. In what
follows, we offer a slightly new deﬁ nition ofcomputational geography which cap-

tures the impact of data-intensive computing or eScience, and we state how it is
different from, for example, geoinformatics.
   Computational geography is a transformed data-driven geography that aims to
understand the underlying mechanisms of geographic forms and processes viasim-
ulations of complex geographic phenomena and based on data-intensive compuitng.

Along with the emergingﬁeld of computational social science (Lazer et al.  2009 ) ,
128                                                                         B. Jiang


computational geography is both data and computationally intensive. Computational
geography is a science of geography thatfocuses on geographic formsand processes
and that offers explanations through simulations. In other words, what computational
geography seeks to address is not only how the world looks but also how the world

works. This is in contrast to the focus of GIScience on how the world looks rather
than how the world works (Goodchild     2004). In contrast, geoinformatics usually
takes an engineering or geoscience approach, with the goal of developing tools and
models for geospatial data acquisition, management, analysis, and visualization to
deal with real-world problems. Despite the difference, both computational geography

and geoinformatics are closely related in terms of geospatial information and develd
tools. This view on the difference between geoinformatics and computational
geography reﬂects a similar view about “bioinformatics” being a ﬁeld of engineering
and “computational biology” being a science.
   Much of the appeal of computational geography in the twenty-ﬁrst century lies in
the increasing availability of massive amounts of data about our environments and

human activities in both physical and virtual spaces. With the increasing volume of
data being generated from all types of scientiﬁc instruments, often acquired on a 24/7
basis, computational geography should adopt data-intensive geospatial computing to
practice the science of geography. In this regard, the deployment of high-performance
computing, grid/cloud computing, and geographically distributed sensors provides a

powerful means of computing. At the same time, the emerging VGI contributed by
volunteers and gathered via social media constitutes a valuable and unprecedented
data source for researchers in computational geography. In the next section, we will
draw upon some of our recent studies to illustrate what computational geography is
and how VGI can support computational geography research.



   8.3      Examples of Computational Geography


Here, we describe a few recent computational geography studies that use VGI or
OSM in particular. Central to these studies are two basic concepts: topology and
scaling. Topology refers to the topological relationships of numerous geographic
units, while scaling is often characterized by a power-law distribution or a heavy-

tailed distribution in general. We illustrate in this section that both topology and
scaling help uncover the underlying structures and patterns of geographic space, but
ﬁrst we must further clarify these two concepts.



   8.3.1      Concepts of Topology and Scaling


Topology, initially a branch of mathematics, can be deﬁned as the study of qualitative
properties that are invariant under distortion of geometric space. For this reason,
topology is also called “rubber geometry.” In the GIS literature, the concept of topology
has appeared on at least two occasions. The most familiar is probably topologically
8  Volunteered Geographic Information and Computational Geography…                 129
















 Fig. 8.1Two versions of the London underground map: (a) a geometric map and (b) a topological
map




integrated geographic encoding and referencing (TIGER). The TIGER data structure or
database was created by the US Census Bureau in the 1970s. The concept of topology
also appeared in the GIS literature with Max Egenhofer and Robert Franzosa’1    s9(91 )
formulation of the topological relationship. Although the essence of topology is the

same (which is about relationships), we adopt the notion of topology to refer to
topologically based geospatial analysis. Topology, in contrast to geometric aspects such
as locations, orientations, sizes, and shapes, is concerned with the relationship of
geographic objects or units. To further elaborate the difference between topology and
geometry, let us examine the London underground map as an illustrative example.

    Figure8.1illustrates two versions of the London underground map: the left is
geometrically corrected (a geometric map), while the right is topologically retained
but geometrically distorted (a topological map). As one can see, all the locations and
links of the stations are completely distorted in the topological map, with the excep-

tion of the relative orientations between the stations. This topological map is much
more informative than the geometric map in terms of navigation along the tube lines.
However, if we want to obtain in-depth structures or patterns, this topological map
provides little information. For example, how many lines must be passed to get from
one station to another? One can simply ﬁgure out the answer with the 12 tube lines.

What if there are hundreds of lines? Put more generally, how many intermediate
streets must be crossed in one city to go from one street to another? This is a basic
question that, for example, is relevant to a taxi driver who is seeking optimal routes.
    Figure8.2 presents two versions of a topological map. Figure 8.2b illustrates a

topological map showing the intersection or topology of tube lines, from which we
can see certain in-depth structures. Among the 12 lines, 10 form an interconnected
core in which nearly everyone is connected to everyone else, forming a sort ofp  clote
graph. Two lines, the East London line and the Waterloo & City line, are outside the
core, with few connections to the others. This map indicates that if someone travels

from the East London line to the Waterloo & City line, he or she must pass through
another intermediate line; the two lines are not directly connected. In comparison
130                                                                             B. Jiang















 Fig. 8.2Two versions of topological maps: ( a) topology of stations and ( b) topology of lines
(Note: the node sizes in the right image show how many other lines intersect, i.e., the degree of
connectivity)


with the geometric map, the topological map of the stations still retains certain
geometric aspects, such as the relative positions and/or orientations of the lines and

stations. In this regard, the topological map of the lines is purely topological: there
are neither geometric locations for the nodes nor geometric distance for the links.
   Scaling, or more speciﬁcally the scaling of geographic space in the context of
this chapter, refers to the fact that there are far more small things than large ones in
a geographic space. For example, there are far more small cities than large ones, far

more short streets than long ones, and far more low buildings than high buildings.
This phenomenon of “far more small events than large ones” is widespread, so it
is said to be “more normal than normal.” Scaling is the regularity behind many
geographic phenomena. That there are far more small things than large ones also
underscores a kind of spatial heterogeneity, i.e., there is no average thing ingrapohic

space. Because of the lack of an average thing, geographic space can also be said to
be scale free. Note that scale in “scale free” means size, an average size or an mrieich
mean. “Scale free” implies that a notion of average size or mean makes little sense
in characterizing a variable that exhibits a power-law distribution. The variation of
things in a geographic space is highly heterogeneous or diverse. A major difference

between the scaling of geographic space and spatial heterogeneity is that the former
is characterized by a power-law distribution,while the latter by anormal distribution.
In general, scaling must be characterized by heavy-tailed distributions such as a
power-law or lognormal and exponential functions.




   8.3.2       The First Example: Street Pattern of Sweden

The interconnected streets of a country constitute its basic infrastructure or back-

bone. Streets form a connected whole stretching across the county. Unfortunately,
although the graph representation has found many applications in the computation
of distance, routing, and tracing, the underlyingstructure and pattern ofstreets cannot
be simply illustrated with the conventional street networks using junctions and street
8  Volunteered Geographic Information and Computational Geography…                  131






















 Fig. 8.3Four levels of detail showing the hierarchical structure of the 160,000 streets of Sweden:
(a) source map, (b ) ﬁ rst levelc,) (second level, and (d ) third level



segments, respectively, as the nodes and links of a graph. We call the conventional
street network a geometric network in the sense that (1) every junction has a unique
geographic location and (2) every street segment is assigned a geometric distance.

The geometric network embeds the connectivity of street junctions or that of street
segments. Structurally, the conventional street network illustrates a monotonous
pattern because every junction is connected by almost the same number of other
junctions, or equivalently, every segment is connected by almost the same number

of other segments. However, the topology   of streets exhibits avery interestingpattern,
which can be said to be universal for alltypes of street networks allover the world.
   We retrieved the entire Swedish street network database from the OSM databases
and generated individual streets to assess how they are connected to each other.

Note that the streets can be put into twocategories: streets identiﬁed byunique names
(Jiang and Claramunt 2004    )and natural streets generated by joining principles
(Jiang et al. 2008). In this study, we ﬁrst merged adjacent street segments with the
same names to create street units and then adopted some principle to join the street

units into natural streets. This procedure was performed because of the missing
names for many street segments in the OSM databases. The resulting natural streets
are very close to named streets. Eventually, we obtained over 160,000 streets from
over 600,000 arcs. Figure8.3 illustrates the hierarchical levels of the street network

and indicates that there are far more shorsttreets (blue) than largeones (red).Theleast
connected streets have a degree of 1, while the most connected streets have a degree
of 1,040. This very high ratio of the most connected degree to the least connected
degree is a clear indicator of a heavy-tailed distribution.

   Thisﬁnding of the scaling pattern of the street network has profound implica-
tions for understanding other phenomena such as trafﬁcﬂow. For example, the
majority of trafﬁc ﬂow occurs on only in a few of the most connected streets, while
132                                                                           B. Jiang


a vast majority of less connected streets accommodate only a small amount of the
traf ﬁ c ﬂ ow (Jian2g009 ) . Eventually, traf ﬁ c ﬂ ow and human mobility patterns
also demonstrate this scaling pattern. We can further claim that it is the scaling of
geographic space that shapes human movement patterns. This is the type of mencih  sm

that we seek to discover through computational geography.
   In addressing why human activities show the scaling pattern, Barabási(      2010 )
tried to seek an answer from the perspective of people rather than that of space.
He explains that we conduct our affairs in bursts because we set a priority for them.
In terms of human movement, we spend most of our time (e.g., 90% of our time)

in one place near our home, city, or nearby, and only occasionally (e.g., 10% of
our time or less) do we travel somewhere far from where we usually are. This is a
traditional way of thinking—society is complicated because every individual person
is complicated; in fact, we can think of individuals as molecules or atoms (Buchanan
2007). In a recent study, Jiang and Jia ( 2011a) created two types of moving agents
(random and purposive) and simulated their movement patterns in a street network.

It was found that moving behaviors have little effect on the overall trafﬁc patterns.
   Given the scaling pattern or property, map generalization or mapping in
general can be conducted in a simple manner. The head/tail division rule that we
formulated can be applied in this case. The head/tail division rule states that any-
thing with the scaling pattern can be divided into two imbalanced parts: a low

percentage of larger items in the head and a high percentage of smaller items in
the tail (Jiang and Liu 2012). In fact, Fig.8.3 illustrates an application of the head/
tail division rule by simply placing larger streets in the head recursively to create
different levels of detail (Jiang 2012). We further conjecture that the scaling of
geographic space is some fundamental underlying mechanism of map generalizta      ion

(Jiang et al. 2011), which is the underlying property that makes generalization and
mapping possible.



8.3.3 The Second Example: Street Block Pattern of France


The second exemplar concerns the scaling pattern that emerges from the numer-
ous street blocks of a country. A street block refers to a minimum ring or cycle
formed by adjacent street segments, also called a “city block” in an urban envimroent.
By street blocks, we mean both city blocks in cities and ﬁeld blocks in the coun srye.

We developed a recursive algorithm to automatically derive a massive number of
street blocks from street networks of the three largest European countries (Jiang and
Liu 2012). In this chapter, we use the French case as an example to illustrate how
the interconnected blocks help uncover underlying patterns. First, we found that
the sizes of the blocks show a lognormal distribution, one of several heavy-tailed

distributions. This observed distribution implies that there are far more small blocks
than large ones. Interestingly, using the head/tail division rule, we can partition all
the blocks into categories: those smaller than the mean and those greater than the
mean. In fact, the smaller blocks can be clustered into cities, while the larger ones
constitute the countryside.
8  Volunteered Geographic Information and Computational Geography…                133
















 Fig. 8.4Centers of France: (a) topological center and (b ) geometric center


   Second, we deﬁned the notion of border numbers, indicating how far individual
blocks are from the outermost border. Inspired by the notion of Bacon numbers,

whichshow how far an actor or actress is from Kevin Bacon in the Hollywood universe
(“six degrees of Kevin Bacon”), the border numbers are deﬁned as follows: the blocks
on the outermost border have border number 1, those blocks directly connected to
blocks with border number 1 have border number 2, and so on. The border number is
deﬁned from a topological perspective, which is clearly different from a geometric

perspective. Figure 8.4illustrates the difference. Both geometric and topological
distances are colored using a spectral color legend: the farther a block is, the more
central it is. There are two centers: a topological center and a geometric center. Clearly,
the topological center is the location of Paris. The geometric center is, in fact, a direct
application of the medial axis (Blum1967). The geometric center is not what human

beings perceive to be the center of the country but the topological center is.
   We can extend this reasoning to deﬁne a center in biological organisms. For
example, what is the center of the human body? Relying on Blum’s medial axis, we
would derive the skeleton, but common sense tells us that both the heart and the
mind are the two centers of the human body. We conjecture that if we were to take

the topological perspective, we would be able to derive these two centers. This is
based on the assumption that the sizes of the cells or any subunits, similar to the
blocks, are heavy-tail distributed. We have not found any scientiﬁc literature tosurpt
the above reasoning, but we need new geographic imaginations in the computer age

(Sui 2004); data-intensive computing, involving a massive amount of geographic
information, facilitates creative imagination in some unique ways.



   8.3.4      The Third Example: Verifying Zipf’s
         Law via Natural Cities


The scaling property has several variants, one of which is Zipf’s law, formulated by
the linguist George Kingsley Zipf (1949). Zipf’s law states that the size of any city
is inversely proportional to its rank, for example, the second largest city is 1/2 of the
134                                                                               B. Jiang


               10 0


                                                          Resolution400
               10−1
                                                          Power law fit
                                                          Resolution500
               10−2                                       Power law fit
                                                          Resolution600

                                                          Power law fit
               10−3                                       Resolution700
              ≥)                                          Power law fit

              P10X4


                 −5
               10


               10−6



               10−7
                  10 0            10 2             104             105
                                                x

 Fig. 8.5Power-law distributions of natural cities derived with different resolutions



largest one; the third largest city is 1/3 of the largest, and so on. Usually, city sizes
are measured by their population or physical extent. Conventionally, cities are

deﬁned legally or administratively, for example, as census-designated places, urban
areas, or metropolitan areas. The subjective and even arbitrary nature of these

deﬁnitions poses problems for the veriﬁcation of Zipf’s law. In this regard, there
have already been studies seeking more objective deﬁnitions of cities or city bound-
aries (e.g., Holmes and Lee2009; Rozenfeld et al.2011 ) . However, such studies still

used aggregated data rather than individual-based data for deﬁning cities.
   We propose a new approach to deﬁning cities by adopting street nodes as a proxy

of population (Jiang and Jia2011b). We retrieved over 120 GB of OSM data for the
USA, and we extracted 25 million street nodes. By applying a clustering algorithm,

we grouped the nearest street nodes into individual urban settlements. We deﬁne the
derived urban settlements as “natural cities” because the clustering was performed
recursively and automatically. Eventually, we obtained approximately two to four

million natural cities, depending on the chosenresolutions for theclustering process.
The resolutions we chose were 400, 500, 600, and 700 m because they were the

same magnitude as the city block sizes. Interestingly, the derived natural citiesis ntriyk
exhibit a power-law distribution, but the Zipf exponent may deviate from 1.0.
   We conducted a comparison study by examining Zipf’s law between natural cities

and urban areas and found that the law is remarkably stable for all natural cities,
ranging from the largest to the smallest (with only one road node) (Jiang and Jia

2011b). Surprisingly, the Zipf exponent remains unchanged for the entire range; one
can refer to Fig. 8.5for the log-log plot of the distribution. This result contrasts
8  Volunteered Geographic Information and Computational Geography…               135


sharply with the results for urban areas, which exhibit Zipf’s law for some of the
largest cities; the Zipf exponent varies from one part to another of the entire range.
This behavior may indicate that Zipf’s law, or the power law in general, underlies

certain self-organized processes.


   8.4      Discussions


We have introduced two key concepts around which three studies regarding compu-

tational geography have been presented to uncover the underlying scaling property
and in particular to illustrate the underlying mechanism of human activity patterns
in geographic space. Let us further elaborate the implications of these studies.
Current geospatial analysis is very much dominated by two stubborn mindsets: one
is geometric thinking in terms of sizes, shapes, orientations, and positions and the

other is a Gaussian way of thinking that uses geostatistics to characterize spatial
properties such as spatial dependence and spatial heterogeneity. Spatial dependence
also goes by the name spatial autocorrelation, which is expressed succinctly by
Tobler’s 1(970 )    ﬁ rst law of geographe  yverything is related to everything else,
but near things are more related than distant things” (p. 236). Spatial heterogeneity

emphasizes that the Earth’s surface is heterogeneous, but this heterogeneity is still
very much characterized by a normal distribution. Statistical theories based on
scaling and heavy-tailed distributions are rarelyadopted for the studyof geographic
phenomena. We, therefore, want to promote two alternative ways of thinking,
topological thinking and scaling thinking, to get insights into geographic forms and

processes.
   Topological thinking is rooted in one of the two fundamental views about space—
Leibniz’s relative space, which focuses on relationships between individual objects.
This is to be understood in contrast to geometric or topographic thinking, which is
dominated by Newtonian ideas about absolute space. The topological focus on rela-

tionships is not particularly new, since it was well treated in geographic literature a
long time ago (e.g., Haggett and Chorley 1969 ) . However, what is considered to be
unique or interesting in this chapter is how topological thinking helps us appreciate
the scaling pattern. Thinking topologically is part of thinking spatially, and it is
becoming increasingly important at a time when most of human activities have

shifted to virtual space and when emerging social media is coming to dominate
everyday human activities (Allen 2011 ) .
   It should be noted that there are at least two factors that prevent us from gaining
insight into the scaling of geographic space: (1) how we look at geographic space

(perspective) and (2) the size of the study areas we choose (scope). For example, the
geometric representation of street networks is unable to demonstrate the scaling
property. More importantly, the geometric representation is not what human beings
perceive about street networks. The second factor is closely related to the availability
of massive amounts of crowdsourced geographic information. In this regard, VGI

provides an unprecedented data source enabling usto conduct this typeof geospatial
analysis and modeling.
136                                                                           B. Jiang


   One may argue that geographic information maintained by governments or pri-
vate companies would allow us to achieve the same goal. This would indeed be true
if the data were accessible, but this is easily said and only rarely done. First of all,

there are many restrictions on access to data. Secondly, the data studied are rarely
shared among all interested parties. What if some other researchers want to verify
the results with the same data? Often there is no way to do so. Thisis a bigconstraint
for scientiﬁc research. With OSM, for theﬁrst time, we can seamlessly integrate
publicly available geographic information and continuously keep it updated through

volunteered efforts.
    There are many other formats of VGI, emerging from a variety of social media such
as Facebook, Twitter, and Flickr, which are not addressed in this chapter. These data may
go beyond what Goodchild (2007) refer to about VGI, but their potential for studying
spaces and places could be enormous. The convergence of GIS and social media is

providing new ways of studying interactions among people, space, and place, which
are fundamental to geography (Sui and Goodchild2011). We believe there are needs
for much further studies to be conducted along these directions in the future.



   8.5      Concluding Remarks


In this chapter, we brieﬂy reviewed the emergence of computational geography, its
deﬁnitions, and its evolution in the past two decades. We provided an alternative

deﬁnition of computational geography that deals with simulations of geographic
phenomena to uncover the underlying mechanisms of geographic forms and processes.
Computational geography is distinct from geoinformatics, which is more concerned
with the engineering side of geographic information in terms of data acquisition,

management, analysis, and visualization. Governments have put enormous effort into
data collection (e.g., population censuses, housing, and economic activity), but
these data are seldom made available for research. In this regard, VGI, and OSM in
particular, provides a valuable data source for computational geography.
    We provided several examples of research in computational geography that relies

on VGI and that rests on conceptualizations of relative and relational space. Despite
of being an important way to conceptualize space, geographic studies still tend to
examine (absolute) space in the geometric sense rather than the topological sense
we refer to in this chapter. It is time to retthe relative viewof space ingeographic
studies, particularly in computational geography. Gatrell’s(     1984 ) ideas remain

valid and deserve greater attention in geographic research, especially alternative
ways of conceptualizing and deﬁning space. We have seen in this chapter that toopgoyl
and scaling indeed matter in geospatial analysis. We need to shift our mindsets from
geometric to topological thinking and from the Gaussian mindset to something that
is more “normal” than normal—the scaling property.


 AcknowledgementThe author would like to thank thebook editors for their constructvie comments
that led to many improvements, in particular Daniel Sui, for bringing my attention to recent refer-
ences on topological thinking in human geography.
  8  Volunteered Geographic Information and Computational Geography…                           137



       References


   Allen, J. (2011). Topological twists: Power’s shifting geographs.ialogues in Human Geography,
     1 (3), 283–298.
    Barabási, A. (2010 B).rsts: The hidden pattern behind everything we do . Boston, MA: Dutton

     Adult.
    Bennett, J. (2010O).enStreetMap: Be your own cartographer. Birmingham: PCKT Publishing.
 Blum, H. (1967). A transformation for extracting new descriptors of form. In W. Whaten-Dunn
     (Ed.), Models for the perception of speech and visual form (pp. 362–380). Cambridge, MA:
     MIT Press.

    Buchanan, M. (2007   T)h.e social atom: Why the rich get richer, cheaters get caught, and your
     neighbor usually looks like you. New York: Bloomsbury.
  Couclelis, H. (1998). Geocomputation in context. In P. A. Longley, S. M. Brooks, R. McDonnell,
     & B. Macmillan (Eds.), Geocomputation: A primer. Chichester: Wiley.

  Egenhofer, M., & Franzosa, R. (1991). Point-set topological spatial relationsI.nternational Journal
     of Geographical Information Systems, 5 (2), 161–174.
Ehlen, J., Caldwell, D. R., & Harding, S. (2002). GeoComputation: What is it?          Computers,
     Environment and Urban Systems, 26 , 257–265.

 Frank, A. U., Campari, I., & Formentini, U. (1992).    Theories and methods of spatio-temporal
     reasoning in geographic space (Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 639). Berlin:
     Springer.
  Gahegan, M. (1999). What is geocomputation? Transactions in GIS, 3 (3), 203–206.

    Gatrell, A. C. (198D4i)s.tance and space: A geographical perspective. Oxford: Oxford University
     Press.
  Giles, J. (2005). Internet encyclopedias to head to head. Nature, 438 , 900–901.
  Goodchild, M. F. (1992). Geographical information scienceI.nternational Journal of Geographical
     Information Systems, 6 (1), 31–45.

 Goodchild, M. F. (2004). The validity and usefulness of laws in geographic information science
     and geography. Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 94 (2), 300–303.
 Goodchild, M. F. (2007). Citizens as sensors: The world of volunteered geography.    GeoJournal,
     69 (4), 211–221.

  Haggett, P., & Chorley, R. J. (1969). Network analysis in geography. London: Edward Arnold.
  Hey, T., Tansley, S., & Tolle, K. (2009). The fourth paradigm: Data intensive scientiﬁc discovery .
     Redmond: Microsoft Research.
 Holmes, T. J., & Lee, S. (2009). Cities as six-by-six-mile squares: Zipf’s law? In E. L. Glaeser

     (Ed.), The economics of agglomerations. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
    Howe, J. (2009 C)r.owdsourcing: Why the power of the crowd is driving the future of business  .
     New York: Three Rivers Press.
 Jiang, B. (2009). Street hierarchies: A minority of streets account for a majority of trafﬁcﬂow.
     International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 23 (8), 1033–1048.

  Jiang, B. (2012). Head/tail breaks: A new classiﬁcation scheme for data with a heavy-tailed distri-
     bution. The Professional Geographer xx, xx–xx.
  Jiang, B., & Claramunt, C. (2004). Topological analysis of urban street networks. nvironment and
     Planning B: Planning and Design, 31 , 151–162.

  Jiang, B., & Jia, T. (2011a). Agent-based simulation of human movement shaped by the underlying
     street structure. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 25 (1), 51–64.
  Jiang, B., & Jia, T. (2011b). Zipf’s law for all the natural cities in the United States: A geospatial
     perspective. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 25 (8), 1269–1281.

Jiang, B., & Liu, X. (2012). Scaling of geographic space from the perspective of city andﬁeld
     blocks and using volunteered geographic information. International Journal of Geographical
     Information Science, 26(2), 215–229. Preprint, arxiv.org/abs/1009.3635.
  Jiang, B., Zhao, S., & Yin, J. (2008). Self-organized natural roads for predicting trafﬁc ﬂow:
     A sensitivity study.Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment. July, P07008,

     Preprint, arxiv.org/abs/0804.1630.
 138                                                                                     B. Jiang


 Jiang, B., Liu, X., & Jia, T. (2011). Scaling of geographic space as a universal rule for map general-

    ization. Preprint:http://arxiv.org/abs/1102.1561.
  Lazer, D., Pentland, A., Adamic, L., Aral, S., Barabási, A.-L., Brewer, D., Christakis, N., Contractor,
    N., Fowler, J., Gutmann, M., Jebara, T., King, G., Macy, M., Roy, D., & Van Alstyne, M.
    (2009). Computation social science. Science, 323 , 721–724.

 Longley, P. A., Brooks, S. M., McDonnell, R., & Macmillan, B. (1998G ).eocomputation: A primer.
    Chichester: Wiley.
 Longley, P. A., Goodchild, M. F., Maguire, D. J., & Rhind, D. W. (2001).Geographic information
    systems and science. Chichester: Wiley.

 Macmillan, B. (1998). Epilogue. In P. A. Longley, S. M. Brooks, R. McDonnell, & B. Macmillan
    (Eds.), Geocomputation: A primer. Chichester: Wiley.
 Openshaw, S., & Abrahart, R. J. (2000). GeoComputation. London: CRC Press.
   Raymond, E. S. (200T   1).e Cathedral & The Bazaar: Musings on Linux and open source by an

    accidental revolutionary. Sebastopol: O’Reilly Media.
 Rozenfeld, H. D., Rybski, D., Gabaix, X., &Makse, H. A. (2011). The areaand population of cities:
    New insights from a different perspective on cities.    American Economic Review, 101 (5),
    2205–2225.

 Sui, D. Z. (2004). GIS, cartography, and the “third culture”: Geographic imaginations in the com-
    puter age. The Professional Geographer, 56 (1), 62–72.
Sui, D. Z. (2008). The wikiﬁcation of GIS and its consequences: Or Angelina Jolie’s new tattoo
    and the future of GIS. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 32 (1), 1–5.

Sui, D. Z., & Goodchild, M. (2011). The convergence of GIS and social media: Challenges for
    GIScience. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 25 (11), 1737–1748.
Tobler, W. (1970). A computer movie simulating urban growth in the Detroit region.     Economic
    Geography, 46 (2), 234–240.

   Zipf, G. K. (194H 9)u.man behavior and the principles of least effort. Cambridge, MA: Addison
    Wesley.
   Chapter 9

The Evolution of Geo-Crowdsourcing:

Bringing Volunteered Geographic
Information to the Third Dimension



    Marcus Goetz       and   Alexander Zipf






 AbstractVolunteered geographic information (VGI) describes the collaborative
and voluntary collection of any kind of spatial data, and has evolved to become an
important source for geo-information. Users participate in VGI communities and

share their data with other community members at no charge. The data is based
on personal measurements or personal knowledge, as well as on available aerial
imagery provided by Bing Maps etc. In the early beginnings, VGI comprised only
two-dimensional (2D) data, but now more and more users also contribute
3D-compliant data such as height information. By utilizing such 3D information or
3D-VGI, it is possible to create virtual but increasingly realistic 3D map features

and models that can be compared to products such as Google Earth. In this chapter,
the evolution of VGI from 2D to 3D is discussed. In particular, the creation of a 3D
virtual globe including visualization of 3D building models as well as trafﬁc infra-
structure, landuse areas, and points of interest (POIs) is reviewed. Additional data
sources and the semantic enrichment of virtual models are also discussed.

Crowdsourced geodata can serve as a real alternative data source and VGI can be
utilized for generating rich 3D city models.



   9.1     Introduction


The terms geo-crowdsourcing, user-generated geographic content, and volunteered
geographic information (VGI) describe a quite new phenomenon in geoinformatics,
whereby an ever-expanding group of users collaboratively and voluntarily collects
different types of spatial data (Goodchil2007a). That is, both laypeople and




  M. Goe*tz) •(A. Zipf
  GIScience research group , University of Heidelberg , Heidelberg , Germany
e-mail: m.goetz@uni-heidelberg.de ; zipf@uni-heidelberg.de

D. Sui et al. (eds.), Crowdsourcing Geographic Knowledge: Volunteered Geographic
Information (VGI) in Theory and Practice, DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-4587-2_9,
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
140                                                                M. Goetz and A. Zipf


professionals create geographic data based on (personal) measurements (e.g., via
GPS devices or personal knowledge) and provide this data in a Web 2.0 community
platform to other users of the community. In doing so, the VGI communities create

a comprehensive data source of many different types, with the members of these
communities acting as remote sensors (Goodchild         2007b ) . Especially in urban
regions, VGI data is often available at a very detailed scale, which is the reason for
its increasing use in urban data management (Song and Sun2010). One of the most

popular examples of such a VGI community is the OpenStreetMap (OSM) project,
which will be described in more detail later.
   In the early beginnings of VGI, the available data mainly comprised two-ds   iional
(2D) data, but since 2008, people more and more often started to collect 3D data

such as height information, roof geometry information, etc., transforming VGI from
2D maps and imagery to a 3D data source. Adding 3D information to VGI projects
is an important step, not only due to the fact that we are living in a 3D world, but
also because 3D information allows the development and provision of many different
applications. For example, by providing 3D models for a city district, it is possible

to demonstrate future city development plans to the broad public in a public-
participation process, consistent with Sarjakosksi’suggestion that,“three-dimensional
modeling and photorealistic visualization and animation should be included in
public participation GIS for the sake of space-to-feel level experience in urban

plans” (Sarjakoski 1998). Not only public-participation initiatives beneﬁt from 3D
models, but also (scientiﬁc) analysis often achieves more exact results when using
3D data. For example, in the area of visibility analysis in urban areas, it has been
demonstrated that “3D visibility indices are more effective than 2D indices”
(Yang et al. 2007). Furthermore, 3D information about urban areas supports

decisions in emergencies (Lee 2007; Kolbe et al. 2008; Lee and Zlatanova 2008 ;
Schilling and Goetz 2010)and can also be utilized for visualizing topological
relations (Lee 2001). To the authors of this chapter, it is therefore evident that 3D
information about both urban and rural areas is useful for diverse applications and

it is crucial to have access to different sources of 3D data. By demonstrating the
richness and diversity of VGI data (and especially OSM data), it will be proven that
VGI is a real alternative data source for 3D information. One step towards this, and
also for encouraging the members of VGI communities, is the project OSM-3D : a     1
virtual globe for visualizing OSM data as a 3D model. The fundamental ideas and

basics behind this project have already been described and demonstrated (Over
et al.2010). However, the project has been recently extended to the whole European
region, and additionally, reﬁnements and improvements (especially for building
construction) have been made.

   The remainder of this chapter is organized as follows: First, thereis anintroduction
to the OSM project. Afterwards, there is an extensive overview about the OSM-3D
project with a special focus on a quantitative analysis of 3D-compliant OSM




 www.osm-3d.org
9   The Evolution of Geo-Crowdsourcing: Bringing Volunteered Geographic...           141


attributes, as well as the generation of building models. Additionally, this section
contains an outlook for the enrichment of OSM data by using additional data
sources. Thereafter, there is a discussion about possible semantic enrichment of 3D

city models by using VGI from OSM. The last section summarizes the presented
work and discusses future research.



   9.2      OpenStreetMap: One of the Most Popular

       Examples for VGI


In the last few years, diverse initiatives (with different user groups, aims, etc.) for
the collection of VGI, such as geotagged Flickr images,     2 Wikimapia, Foursquare,    4
Gowalla, etc., have emerged. One of the most popular examples is indisputably the

OpenStreetMap project. OSM was initiated in 2004 and rapidly developed into a
fast growing Web community with currently more than 400,000 registered users,
thus more than 400,000 potential contributors.
   Users of OSM are able to contribute data to the community by adding several

georeferenced points (i.e., nodes) to the database. These points are created by using
personal measurements with a GPS device (e.g., a GPS-enabled cell phone) or by
applying personal knowledge about the surrounding areas. Additionally, different

providers of ﬁne-resolution aerial images such as Bing Maps have granted permis-
sion to use their images for mapping activities (e.g., mapping street segments or
building shapes). This decision has also increased the amount of data inside OSM

because now it is possible to map data around the world without the need of being
there physically. In addition to georeferenced nodes, users within OSM can also
combine them into so-called       ways(i.e., a connection of nodes), allowing the

creation of linestring geometries (e.g., for street segments). These ways do not
necessarily have to be closed (i.e., the starting point equals the ending point), but if
so, they can be further utilized for mapping polygons (e.g., areas) with arbitrary

shape. For mapping complex polygons with outer shells and inner holes, it is also
possible to create so-called relations inside OSM. Additionally, these relations can
be used for describing complex relationships between different OSM nodes or ways.

The latest OSM dataset (November 2011) contains more than 1.25 billion georefer-
enced nodes, 114 million ways, and 1,100,000 relations.
    But OpenStreetMap does not only contain pure geometric information. Additionally,
OSM adapts a concept of open and unlimited key-value pairs for adding different

(semantic) information and attributes on top of the geometry. That is, users can map
their geometries by using nodes, ways, or relations and enrich those with distinct
information by attaching key-value pairs. The key describes a distinct information


 ﬂ ickr.com
 3
 wikimapia.org
 http://foursquare.com
 http://gowalla.com
142                                                                   M. Goetz and A. Zipf























 Fig. 9.1The OSM map perspective on the city of Heidelberg with different types of map features
(streets, buildings, etc.) (OSM11a )



domain or condition, and the corresponding value describes the information itself.

So, for example, a way with the keh   yighway describes a street for vehicles and humans.
Additionally, the value motorwayreﬁnes this street as a motorway not utilizable by
pedestrians. Since the number of key-value pairs is not limited (i.e., a user can add an

arbitrary number of key-value pairs), it is possible to further reﬁne the information
about the motorway, for example, by adding the key maxspeedwith the value 130.
Also, users are enabled to map not only streets but also natural areas such as forests or

seas, different points of interests (POIs) such as ATMs or letter boxes, building ground
shapes, etc. The OSM key-value methodology itself is very open; thus, it is very easy

for a user to add any kind of additional information. There are of course some best
practices and recommendations for mapping different map features such as the keys
amenity,building,natural,place,waterway, etc., as described on the OSM wiki page

(OSM2011b). A complete list of all keys is also available at Tagwatch20      (11 ) .
   The data of OSM itself can be either downloaded from different OSM data
provider platforms (e.g., Geofabrik ) or by using the Web API which is part of the
                                 7
visual Web interface of OSM. By using this Web interface, users (also those who
are not OSM members) can access the 2D online map and browse through the world.
Figure 9.1 depicts an exemplary screenshot of the OSM map. Furthermore, this Web

API also allows the download of OSM data.





 6
 http://download.geofabrik.de/
 http://www.openstreetmap.org
9   The Evolution of Geo-Crowdsourcing: Bringing Volunteered Geographic...      143


   9.3      Three-Dimensional OpenStreetMap


Most applications and research investigations that use OpenStreetMap as a data
source are 2D and only visualize the data in 2D from a bird’s eye view. That is,
according to Over et al. ( 2010), there is little research on the 3D visualization and
usage of OSM data available, and there are basically just two different applications

which provide a real 3D perspective with additional digital terrain model (DTM)
and 3D buildings: the so-called KOSMOS Worldﬂier (Brejc2011 ) and the OSM-3D
project (OSM-3D 2011). A couple of other applications for providing perspective
scenes (withﬂat terrain) and some extruded buildings do also exist, for example,
Ziegler 2(011), but these are very limited regarding scene display size, application
functionality, and 3D visualizations. In contrast, the OSM-3D project is based on

public Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) standards and drafts, such as a Web
Map Service (WMS) or Web 3D Service (W3DS) and dedicated client software, and
provides a detailed virtual globe with atmospheric visualization effects. A compre-
hensive number of data types have been selected and used for displaying different
3D map features such as a DTM, POIs, buildings, streets, labels, natural areas, etc.

   To the authors’ knowledge, OSM-3D is the only project that uses such an exten-
sive amount of OSM data for the generation of 3D models. Furthermore, it is the
ﬁrst approach to generate realistic 3D models (especially building models) by purely
using VGI from OSM, thus demonstrating the richness and power of VGI. Figu9     r.e2a
depicts an overview of the 3D globe in XNavigator. Additionally, Fig.9.2b shows a

more detailed perspective of the Riva Del Garda in Italy, where different natural
areas as well as streets, waterways, and 3buildings are visualized. Thenextsections
will describe OSM-3D in more detail, especially focusing on the generation of 3D
building models and 3D map features. Before that, we include a discussion about
relevant and 3D-compliant OSM keys and values, as well as a brief introduction to
the system architecture of OSM-3D.




   9.3.1      Analyses of 3D-Compliant OpenStreetMap Attributes


Basically, all geographic data in OSM is 2D. The users within the OSM community
measure 2D GPS points or draw geometries based on 2D aerial imagery. Thus, the
visible geometry inside OSM, which is in most cases the visible map that can be
consumed via the Web interface of OSM, is 2D. Therefore, at ﬁrst glance, OpenStreet-
Map does not seem to provide any kind of 3D data. However, when taking a closer

and more detailed look at the data structure as well as the best practices and popular
key-value pairs within the project, it becomes evident that there is nevertheless
plenty of 3D information inside OSM.
   The OSM-key height, as one could imagine due to the semantic meaning of the
key, obviously contains 3D data. It describes the (vertical) height of a map feature,

wherein the default length measure (if not explicitly provided by the user) is meters.
Table 9.1 contains quantitative and qualitative information about the application of
144                                                                 M. Goetz and A. Zipf















































 Fig. 9.2A virtual globe with atmospheric effects ( a) and a detailed view of the Riva Del Garda
with 3D buildings and map features (b). Both are visualized in the client XNavigator of the project
OSM-3D.org



the key height to the three different OSM data types. In contrast, Table9.2 contains
information about the combinatorial usage of the key height with other OSM keys
(only those keys which are supposed to describe 3D objects were utilized as combi-

natorial keys). Some other keys with very little usage are also not considered in the
table. The key building is used for mapping a building,man_made describes every-
thing that is created by people, tower:type describes some kind of tower, landuse is
9  The Evolution of Geo-Crowdsourcing: Bringing Volunteered Geographic...            145


            Table 9.1Quantitative and qualitative information about the OSM-key
          height (November 2011)

           Classi ﬁ cation ﬁ gure                                      Value
          Absolute number of map features with the key height       676,339

          Absolute number of nodes with the key height              38,945
          Absolute number of ways with the key height               629,611
          Absolute number of relations with the key height          7,783

          Relative number of map features with the key height       0.0492%
          Relative number of nodes with the key height              0.0031%
          Relative number of ways with the key height               0.5513%

          Relative number of relations with the key height          0.6649%


 Table 9.Investigations of the combinatorial usage of the OSM-key  heightwith other keys

(November 2011)
Combinatorial key    Absolute count       Relative count         Relative count compared
                                          compared to height        to combinatorial key

building             624,122             92.2795%                    1.3931%
man_made              41,122             6.0795%                     5.5403%

tower:type            21,840             3.2291%                     59.4539%
landuse               18,497             2.7348%                     0.3491%
technology            18,150             2.6836%                     99.9233%

amenity                8,994             1.3298%                     0.2247%
natural                5,871             0.8681%                     0.0923%
shelter                4,899             0.7243%                     3.2327%

barrier                3,116             0.4607%                     0.2734%
building:part          1,292             0.1910%                     27.7479%
bridge                  164              0.0242%                     0.0142%



utilized for describing any kind of usage type (normally areas, but it is also often

used for the usage type of buildings)t,echnology is used fordescribing thetechnology
of towers, amenity describes any kind of facility,     natural is used for describing
different natural areas, the keyshelter is used for describing a shelter, the keybarrier

can be utilized for mapping obstacles such as walls or fences, the keybuilding:part
describes a part of a building, and the key bridge can be used for mapping bridges

(for streets, railways, etc.). All statistics are based on analyses of the latest OSM
dataset. The list is ordered in descending order.

   As described in Table 9.2, most map features for which height information is
available are buildings. Also, it is interesting that nearly every element with the key

technology is also enriched with height information. Since it is likely that some of
the keys mentioned in Table 9.2are also combinatorial keys of the key          building ,
Table 9.3 shows adjusted values, that is, the analysis refers to map features which

are not buildings.



 8
 Data from 12 November 2011.
146                                                                 M. Goetz and A. Zipf


                Table 9.Investigations of map features which are not building
              but have height information (November 2011)

                                                         Relative count
               Combinatorial key       Absolute count   compared to height
              man_made                23,984               3.5462%

              tower:type              21,695               3.2077%
              landuse                    127               0.0188%
              technology              18,149               2.6834%

              amenity                  7,600               1.1237%
              natural                  5,866               0.8673%
              shelter                  4,895               0.7237%
              barrier                  3,109               0.4597%

              bridge                     157               0.0232%




          Table 9.4Comparing the key height with building:height (November 2011)
         Classi ﬁ cation ﬁ gure                   Absolute count         Relative count

         Buildings with the key height         624,122               1.3931%
            (nonexclusive)
         Buildings with the key building:height 28,323               0.0632%
            (nonexclusive)

         Buildings with the key height         623,857               1.3925%
            (exclusive)
         Buildings with the key building:height 28,058               0.0626%
            (exclusive)

         Buildings with both keys                 265              0.0006%
         Buildings with both keys                  249               0.0005%
            and equal values





   It becomes obvious that nearly all map features with height information are

buildings or at least closely related to buildings (e.g., building parts or roofs). In
some ways, this is not very surprising because (besides a DTM) buildings are indeed
3D, whereas, for example, streets on the ground could also be considered (nearly)

2D. In contrast, it is questionable how height information makes sense for a 2D
natural area, for example, although there are more than 5,000 natural areas with

height information.
   Due to the open key-value methodology in OSM, a different key for height informa-
tion of buildings, namely, building:heigh,twas used in the early mapping activities.

Although this key has been declared as obsolete and replaced by the general k    heeight,
there are still map features with this key available and even some users who still utilize

building:heightinstead of heightfor their new building mappings. Table9.4 contains
information about the usage of those keys, as well as a comparison between the provided
values. As one can see, there are also a couple of buildings with both keys available but

with different values. In most cases, the values only differ by 1–2 m, but there are alsov
few cases with differences of 5 or more meters. The biggest difference is 21 m.
9  The Evolution of Geo-Crowdsourcing: Bringing Volunteered Geographic...        147

















 Fig. 9.3 Development of the amount of buildings in OpenStreetMap



   Besides the keys height and building:height, there are also some other keys with
height information such asseamark:light:height (total usage: 23,009) for describing
the height of a sea light,light:height (total usage: 1,348) for describing the height of
a light (e.g., a street light), or min_height(total usage: 1,321) for describing the

elevation of a map feature (i.e., the space between the ground and the feature, mostly
used in combination with building). However, currently they are rarely used and
will thus not be investigated in detail within this chapter. Nevertheless, they still
might contain 3D-related data and thus might be relevant when creating 3D models
from OpenStreetMap.

   As discussed above, the keyheight is in most cases applied to a building feature. In
the early days of OSM, users concentrated on streets and land-use areas and mapped
hardly any buildings. But over the course of time and with an increasing interest in
OSM, users started to map more and more buildings. The release of aerial imagery
from Bing Maps for OSM has further increased this trend. Figure      9.3 depicts the

development of the total number of buildings over the course of time between early
2007 (zero buildings) and end of 2011 (about 45 million buildings). It is particularly
impressive that there are nearly as many buildings inside OSM as the streets (currently
about 45.6 million) that used to be the biggest fraction of OSM map features.



   9.3.2      System Architecture


The main component of the system architecture is the Web 3D Service (W3DS), a
Web service for deriving 3D scene graphs in a common 3Dﬁle format such as
VRML or X3D. It is currently considered as a draft speciﬁcation (OGC2005 ) , but it
is likely that W3DS will become an Open Geospatial Consortium standard in the

near future. Within OSM-3D, a prototypical implementation of W3DS has been
developed, allowing the provision of 3D VRML models based on OSM. The models
are available as VRML because of strong and wide support in common browsers, as
well as good compression rates for the data. To visualize the data, a client software
148                                                                M. Goetz and A. Zipf


the XNavigator has been developed.This client software allows very intuitive and
user-friendly consumption of the data derived from the W3DS because the client
automatically sends the location-dependent user requests to the W3DS, so the user
does not have to do this on his or herwn. Additionally, the clientallows theselection

of individual layers with different types ofdata, such as buildings,streets, andnatural
areas. Furthermore, additional functionalities such as routing, address search, POI
search, or GPS track visualization add valueto the application. Sinceall components
are based on OGC standards, the application platform is very ﬂexible and scalable.
Also, all layers can be styled according to user requirements by using 3D-styled

layer descriptors (3D-SLD) (Over et al.      2010). This very short introduction to
OSM-3D and its architecture ought to be enough in the context of this chapter. For
more detailed information, please refer to common publications such as Zipf et al.
 (2007 ) , Schilling et a2l.009), and Over et al.( 2010 ) . Furthermore, some details
about the performance as well as the data processing are described in the following
sections, especially Sect. 9.3.5 .



   9.3.3      Generation of Building Features


Besides the DTM (which is not discussed in detail within this chapter), the main 3D
parts of OSM-3D are the 3D building models. As stated above, the whole OSM
dataset currently contains nearly 45 million buildings, that is, 45 million footprints

which are possibly enriched with geometric or semantic information (see below).
Simple footprint geometries, that is, geometries with no holes inside, are mapped as
a single closed way within OSM, whereby the way must contain at least 4 nodes
with theﬁrst node being equal to the last node. For mapping complex polygons
(e.g., buildings with holes inside the footprint), users need to utilize OSM relations.

These consist of one or more outer members (describing the outer shape of theg    pol)
and an arbitrary number of inner members(describing holes inthe shell geometry).
   Obviously, for the generation of 3D building models, the 2D footprint is not
enough, thus additional information is required. As stated above, due to the open
OSM key-value pair methodology, it is no problem to add further (3D) information
to building footprints, and every OSM user can do so. That is, 3D information is not

explicitly mapped as a geometry by the community but implicitly provided as key-
value pairs on top of the corresponding map feature. Table9.5 contains the building
geometry and building appearance-related keys which are currently available in
OSM and are more or less often used within the community. Table9.5 also demon-
strates a disadvantage of the open key-value pair methodology: for some building

attributes (e.g., the roof shape), there are several potential OSM keys available; thus
when investigating them, all potential keys need to be considered and compared
with each other (Fig. 9.4 ).
   How can this information be used to generate 3D building models? One of the
most important attributes of a building is its height because it allows the generation

of a 3D volumetric body by simply extruding the building footprint (which is av   abille
in OSM) with the added height information. Figure        9.5adepicts a quite simple
9  The Evolution of Geo-Crowdsourcing: Bringing Volunteered Geographic...             149


  Table 9.5OSM keys with geometry-related information

                                             Relative count compared
 OSM key                       Absolute countto all buildings          Exemplary values

building:architecture              877          0.00196%                  Renaissance, gothic
building:cladding                9,123          0.02036%                  Brick, panel

building:cladding:colour             3          0.00001%                  Black
building:colour/color              915          0.00204%                  White, brown
building:façade:colour/color       125          0.00028%                  White, brown

building:facade:material         1,083          0.00242%                  Glass, wood, brick
building: ﬂ oors                    30          0.00007%                  7

building:levels                435,879          0.97294%                  12, 56
building:min_height                  5          0.00001%                  5, 18
building:min_level               3,305          0.00738%                  1, 5

building:roof                   61,211          0.13663%                  Pitched, hipped
building:roof:angle              1,979          0.00442%                  30, 20
building:roof:colour/color       2,067          0.00461%                  Red, #05ff78

building:roof:extent                19          0.00004%                  1 (meter)
building:roof:height             1,167          0.00260%                  2, 1.5

building:roof:material             175          0.00039%                  Shingles, metal
building:roof:orientation        4,954          0.01106%                  Along, across
building:roof:shape             26,870          0.05998%                  Pitched, hipped

building:roof:type                 358          0.00080%                  Pitched, hipped


































 Fig. 9.4A simple building footprint (OSM 2011a ) a)(with corresponding 3D building model
(created by extrusion) (OSM-3D 2011 )b)(, as well as a complex building footprint with holes in

the geometry (OSM  2011a )c)(with corresponding 3D building model (OSM-3D 2011 )d()
150                                                                M. Goetz and A. Zipf






















 Fig. 9.5A quite impressive and realistic 3D building model of the Palace of Culture and Science
in Warsaw, Poland (OSM-3D    2011 ) a)(and a building with overhangs, modeled by using
building:min_level (OSM-3D 2011 )b()


building footprint of a rectangular building, and Fig. 9.5b shows the corresponding
3D building model which has been generated by extruding the footprint with the

building height. Also, more complex building footprints, such as those containing
holes in the outer shell (Fig. 9.5c) can be transformed into 3D building models by
footprint extrusion (Fig. 9.5d ).
   By utilizing several closed ways for describing different building parts with indi-

vidual heights, it is even possible to map complex building structures which look
quite impressive. Figure 9.5a depicts such a building, which is a 3D model of the
Palace of Culture and Sciencein Warsaw, Poland. Again, this model is generated by
extruding the individual building parts with their corresponding heights, as well as
considering the values ofbuilding:min_level orbuilding:min_height (which describe

whether a building is raised in the air or located directly on the ground). Figure9.5b
depicts a building which has been mapped with        building:min_levelso that over-
hangs can be expressed and visualized in 3D.
   For generating even more realistic building models, roof geometries can be added

on top of the extruded buildings. That is, the OSM keys which contain roof informa-
tion (currentlybuilding:roof,building:roof:shape, andbuilding:roof:type ) are evaluated.
Since building:roof:shape is deﬁned as a best practice (OSM 2011c ) and also most
commonly used (Table 9.5), this key is evaluatedﬁrst and only if the other keys

considered are not supplied. Currently, the building generation process of OSM-3D
allows the creation ofﬂat roofs, pitched roofs, cross-pitched roofs, hipped roofs,
pyramidal roofs, and gambrel roofs (OSM 2011c). Additional roof types such as
monopitched roofs will also be implemented in the project in the near future.

   The roof-generation process and the required algorithms depend heavily on the
geometry of the building footprints. For very simple footprints which only consist
of one closed way with ﬁve nodes (where the starting node equals the end node),
9  The Evolution of Geo-Crowdsourcing: Bringing Volunteered Geographic...           151





































 Fig. 9.Pseudo code of the algorithm createSimplePitchedRoofwhich creates a pitched roof
geometry



the roof generation is straightforward: each node represents a node of the roof

geometry, thus these are the basis of the roof. Depending on the roof type, other
points can be calculated by utilizing linear algebra. These points are then connected
with each other (again depending on the roof type), so ﬁnally the roof geometry can
be computed. For instance, a pyramidal roof can be computed by calculating the

centroid of the building footprint and creating a triangle geometry for every pair of
adjacent roof basis nodes and the centroid (which is raised in the air). The resulting
four triangle geometries are then the ﬁnal roof geometry. How far the roof is raised
in the air is either explicitly added in OSM with the key     building:roof:height or

implicitly with the key building:roof:angle(though, in this case, the real height
needs to be computed with trigonometric equations). For a pitched roof, there are
some more computations required, but these are also quite straightforward.

   The procedure is depicted in Fig.9.6 as pseudo code. The input parameters of the
algorithm are the 2D footprint geometry of the building and all available OSM k   aely-v
152                                                                M. Goetz and A. Zipf
























 Fig. 9.7Building with a cross-pitched roof, where the OBB of the footprint was the basis for the
roof computation



pairs. If the building has a pitched roof (all potential OSM keys are analyzed), the
algorithm computes a proper roof geometry (also considering the roof orientation
according to building:roof:orientation). Also, if the key      building:roof:extent is

supplied within OSM, the roof geometry is extended accordingly. Other roof types
can be computed with similar algorithms.
   The above algorithms and procedures are valid for simple geometries consisting
ofﬁve points, whereas the geometry does not necessarily have to be rectangular.

Also, for shifted and rotated geometries, this approach returns valid results.
   Some building geometries in OSM are slightly concave, that is, by deﬁnition
they are concave, but when the geometry is compared with the oriented bounding
box (OBB) of the geometry, all points are very close to the OBB. This may be a
result of imprecise mapping but may occur also in the case of very small notches in

the geometry. For the creation of roof geometries for such building footprints, the
approach in OSM-3D ﬁrst applies a slight simpliﬁcation to the building footprint so
that imprecise mappings are neglected. Additionally, it is assumed that geometries
for which every point of the geometry is closer to the OBB than a distinct threshold

do also have a simple roof geometry. Currently, this threshold has been deﬁned as
1 m, so if a geometry has a notch of 0.8 m, a simple roof geometry is computed for
this building. In this case, the basis for the roof computation algorithms is not the
geometry itself but the OBB of the geometry (which can be computed with linear
algebra), as depicted in Fig.9.7. A building footprint with a small notch is the basis

of this building model, where the roof geometry (a cross-pitched roof) is computed
9  The Evolution of Geo-Crowdsourcing: Bringing Volunteered Geographic...          153


for the OBB of the building footprint. These roofs are not really equal to the realrld
roofs, but they can be considered as a quite good approximation of reality, and they
ought to be enough for the sake of a basic VGI-based 3D model. Currently, there is
plenty of work aimed at the improvement of roof geometries. Some ﬁrst prototypical

results were obtained by using straight-skeletonalgorithms with proceduralextrusion
(Laycock and Day2003; Kelly and Wonka2011), but there is still plenty of work to
do for a broad application of these algorithms to OSM data.
   Finally, for making the building models even more realistic and appealing, the
roof can be colored according to the tagbsuilding:roof:colour orbuilding:roof:color ,

and the building body can be colored according to             building:facade:colour,
building:facade:color ,building:colour, or building:color .



   9.3.4      Adding Additional Data Sources


As one can see from the previous sections, there are theoretically many OSM keys
which are relevant for building-model creation, but practically, most of them are
rarely available in OSM. Therefore, it is also interesting to see how OSM data can

be extended by using other data sources.
   One such source is that of the aerial images of Bing Maps, which are publicly
available, and (even more important) can be legally utilized for mapping activities
within OSM. One building property which is rarely available within OSM, but can
be easily derived from Bing Maps aerial images, is information about the roof color

(currently 1,546 OSM features have building:roof:colourand 521 OSM features
have building:roof:color). That is, by utilizing these images, it is possible to gather
additional information which is very useful when creating 3D building models. For
an automatic derivation of building roof colors, a tiny program has been developed.
It takes the centroid of each building shape (only those buildings without a given

roof color) and requests an aerial image from Bing Maps for these distinct coo  nradties.
Within a raster of 100 pixels (10*10 pixels edge length) around thebuilding centroid
(under the precondition that the centroid is inside the shape geometry), an RGB
color code is derived for every pixel. By computing the average of all RGB color
codes, the real roof color can be approximated. Since the Bing Maps API license
only allows 50,000 requests per day, the developed application is limited in this

respect. Until now, the gathered roof color is only stored in an internal database but
not automatically added to the ofﬁcial OSM database. This is due to the fact that an
analysis and investigation of the derived results is still missing, so it is not yet known
how reliable the computed roof colors are. Nevertheless, this approach is likely to
return good results and to add a more realistic variety to the created city models, as

seen in Fig.9.8. Besides aerial images from Bing Maps, also other data sources such
as LiDAR data or terrestrial images can be utilized. However, these will not be
discussed in more detail within this chapter.
154                                                            M. Goetz and A. Zipf

















 Fig. 9.8 Several building models with varying roof colors




   9.3.5      Performance and Statistics

The above mentioned project OSM-3D has already been in operation for a couple

of years. During this time, the required data quantity as well as the processing time
has increased substantially. The system currently covers 3D map features for the
European region; for the rest of the world, all features are 2D (e.g., streets or land-use
areas), and buildings are not computed for non-European areas. The European
restriction has been chosen on the one hand for data reduction and on the other hand

because of the fact that most of the OSM-mapping activities happen in the European
area anyway.
   Focusing on the buildings, the system currently requires a 12-GB database for
2D building footprints (generated beforehand from raw OSM data) and a 68-GB
database for the georeferenced 3D-VRML building models. The two databases

(footprints and models) are distributed on two individual database servers. The pro-
cessing itself is performed weekly on a dedicated workstation with 2.5-GHz CPU
and 2-GB RAM and takes about 75 h.



   9.4     Adding Semantic Information


Obviously, the above described creation processes for a 3D visualization only focus
on geometry; the 3D model is created (as VRML or X3D) and visualized. But what
about the semantics of the model? More and more applications from different ﬁelds

such as urban planning or emergency response require not only pure geometric
models but also semantic information about the different model features. Providing
comprehensive semantics allows more complex and sophisticated applications and
analysis, but a source of semantic information is required.
9  The Evolution of Geo-Crowdsourcing: Bringing Volunteered Geographic...           155


 Table 9.6Examples for semantic building information within OSM
                                       Relative count compared

OSM key                  Absolute countto all buildings          Exemplary values
building:architect              2         0.00001%                  Saarinen
building:architecture         285         0.00073%                  Renaissance, gothic

building:buildyear             16         0.00004%                  1999, 2001
building:condition             60         0.00015%                  Preserved, renovated
building: ﬁ reproof           119         0.00031%                  Yes, no

building: ﬂ oors               11         0.00003%                  7
building:levels           348,013         0.89489%                  12, 56
building:roof              31,288         0.08046%                  Flat, pitched, hipped
building:roof:material        144         0.00037%                  Shingles, metal

building:roof:shape        19,321         0.04968%                  Pitched, hipped
building:roof:type            354         0.00091%                  Hipped, pitched
building:type              58,559         0.15058%                  House, mobile_home

building:use              240,354         0.61805%                  Residential, commercial
name                      575,435         1.47969%                  BST48
addr:country             1,251,101        3.21712%                  Germany
add:city                 1,602,691        4.12122%                  Heidelberg

addr:street              2,483,069        6.38505%                  Berliner Straße
addr:housenumber         2,649,836        6.81388%                  48
building:architect              2         0.00001%                  Saarinen

building:architecture         285         0.00073%                  Renaissance, gothic




   Due to the open key-value pair methodology of OpenStreetMap, there are many
different potential keys which contain not only geometric but also semantic infor-

mation. It can even be stated that the majority of OSM keys are of a semantic type
rather than a geometric type. The semantic information is from various domains,
such as the keyaccess for describing the legal accessibility of a distinct map feature,

the key landuse for describing the primary usage of areas of land, the keytracktype
for providing a classiﬁcation of tracks, the key name for describing the name of a

map feature, the keyoneway for describing one-way characteristics of a street sm egent,
and the keysmoothness for providing a classiﬁ  cation schema for thephysicalusability
of a way for wheeled vehicles. There are many different (semantic) keys and far too

many to be listed in this chapter. Nevertheless, the examples given ought to be
enough for illustration and demonstration of the great diversity of semantic in mfotrion

within OpenStreetMap, ranging from street properties to building properties to
accessibility constraints.
   Since this chapter discusses 3D objects and has a special focus on buildings,

Table 9.6provides an overview of the semantic building information that can be
found in OpenStreetMap. It depicts variouskeys which containsemantic information

about buildings and additionally provides count information as well as some expalm  es.
Generally, in OSM, one must alsodistinguish between differentspellings, especially

American English (AE) and British English (BE), for the keys. Users are asked to
use BE spelling, but AE spelling is also widely used. The values in Table       9.6 are
156                                                               M. Goetz and A. Zipf


accumulated regarding their spelling, that is, different spellings describing the same
information are combined in one row (e.gb .,uilding:facade:colornd building:facade:
colour). Again, there is a great diversity, but there are also some keys which are
rarely used within OSM (e.g., building:architect). Additionally, some of the keys

mentioned in Table 9.5(e.g., building:roof:shape) could also be considered as
semantic information and not only geometric information.



   9.5      Conclusions and Future Work

In this chapter, the potential application of VGI and especially OpenStreetMap for

the generation of 3D models has been discussed. A special focus has been laid on
the generation of 3D city models and building models. First, it has been demon-
strated why it is important to utilize 3D data and 3D models in different applications
and analyses. After a brief introduction to OpenStreetMap, a comprehensive analysis
of 3D-compliant OSM attributes has been provided, as well as diverse quantitative
and qualitative investigations of the current OSM dataset. Afterwards, a very brief

introduction to the architecture of OSM-3D has been given, followed by a detailed
discussion of the creation of 3D building models. Trying to focus not only on geetoy,
an overview and discussion on semantic attributes, that is, OSM keys that contain
semantic information, have been provided. By conducting this research, it can be
demonstrated that VGI (especially from OSM) is a rich and powerful data source for

3D information, which can be utilized for the generation of 3D city models. This
chapter demonstrates what kind of information is available. Furthermore, various
examples show the computation of 3D building models.
   As described above (and also demonstrated in OSM-3D), it is generally possible
to create 3D models based on VGI from OSM. However, the main issue about this

is the missing data in many places. While many cities in Germany (and France) are
mapped to a high degree also with buildings, the situation is different in many other
countries. At the moment, the OSM community of users mainly focuses on geomet-
ric aspects of streets and natural areas (which they can map with their nodes), but
buildings and semantic information about them are not yet typically added.Also,

3D-compliant information is not often added at the moment, which might be the
case because of missing measurement methods for height values, but it is likely that
future cell phones will also include sensors for such measurements. Figure       9.9
depicts a screenshot from the city of Madrid, Spain – it demonstrates the missing
data in some urban areas because Madrid contains few building shapes or even
information about buildings. However, we are conﬁdent that users will be motivated

to add (semantic) information about buildings because projects such as OSM-3D
and other future applications demonstrate the power and potential that lies in
3D-VGI. Another example can be seen in Fig. 9.10. It shows a part of Frankfurt
(Main) in Germany where, similar to many cities in Europe, nearly all building
outlines have been mapped.
9  The Evolution of Geo-Crowdsourcing: Bringing Volunteered Geographic...            157






























 Fig. 9.9The city of Madrid, Spain in OSM-3D (November 2011)































 Fig. 9.10The city of Frankfurt (Main), Germany in OSM-3D (November 2011)
    158                                                                      M. Goetz and A. Zipf


       Focusing on the generation of semantically enriched city models, it is also

    interesting to see if it is possible to generate City Geography Markup Language
    (CityGML, an OGC standard for describing and exchanging semantic building
    models in SDIs (Gröger et al. 2008)) building models from OpenStreetMap. Some

    early results were already achieved, demonstrating that it is possible to generate
    low-level CityGML geometries (similar to those in OSM-3D) with semantic protp              iesr

    (Goetz and Zipf 2012 ) .

     AcknowledgementsThe authors would like to thank all members of the chair of GIScience for

    their proofreading and helpful hints and all contributors to the OSM-3D.org project. Additionally,
    we would like to thank our intern Daniel Söder for creating the screenshots of OSM-3D scenes for
    this chapter. This research has been partially funded by the Klaus-Tschira Foundation (KTS)
    Heidelberg.




      References


   Brejc, I. (2011). Kosmos WorldFlier.     http://igorbrejc.net/category. Accessed November 7,
        2011.
   Goetz, M., & Zipf, A. (2012). Towards deﬁning a framework for the automatic derivation of 3D
        CityGML models from volunteered geographic information.      International Journal of 3-D
        Information Modeling (IJ3DIM) ,1 (2), 1–16.

    Goodchild, M. F. (2007a). Citizens as sensors: The world of volunteered geography. GeoJournal,
        69 (4), 211–221.
    Goodchild, M. F. (2007b). Citizens as voluntary sensors: Spatial data infrastructure in the world of
        Web 2.0. International Journal of Spatial Data Infrastructures Research, 2 , 24–32.
    Gröger, G., Kolbe, T. H., Czerwinski, A., & Nagel, C. (2008). OpenGIS city geography markup

        language (CityGML) encoding standard – version 1.0.0. OGC Doc. No. 08–007r1.
    Kelly, T., & Wonka, P. (2011). Interactive architectural modeling with procedural extrusions.ACM
        Transactions on Graphics, 30 (2), 14–28.
    Kolbe, T. H., Gröger, G., & Plümer, L. (2008). CityGML – 3D city models and their potential for
        emergency response. In S. Zlatanova & J. Li (Eds.), Geospatial information technology for
        emergency response (pp. 257–274). London: Taylor & Francis.

    Laycock, R. G., & Day, A. M. (2003). Automatically generating roof models from building foot-
        prints. Paper presented at the 11th International Conference in Central Europe on Computer
        Graphics, Visualization and Computer Vision (WSCG’ 03), Plzen – Bory, Czech Republic.
      Lee, J. (20013).D data model for representing topological relations of urban features . Paper
        presented at the 21st Annual ESRI International User Conference, San Diego, CA, UnitSdtates.

  Lee, J. (2007). A three-dimensional navigable data model to support emergency response in
        microspatial built-environments. Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 97 (3),
        512–529.
    Lee, J., & Zlatanova, S. (2008). A 3D data model and topological analyses for emergency response
        in urban areas. In S. Zlatanova & J. Li (Eds.),Geospatial information technologyfor emergency
        response (pp. 143–168). London: Taylor & Francis.

    OGC. (2005). Web 3D service. Discussion paper. Ref No. OGC 05–019.
      OSM. (2011a). OpenStreetMap.  http://www.openstreetmap.org/. Accessed November 7, 2011.
      OSM. (2011b). OpenStreetMapWiki.   http://wiki.openstreetmap.org./Accessed November 7, 2011.
OSM. (2011c). Proposed features/Building attributes.             http://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/
        Proposed_features/Building_attributes. Accessed November 7, 2011.

    OSM-3D. (2011). OSM-3D in XNavigator.      http://www.osm-3d.org. Accessed November 7, 2011.
 9   The Evolution of Geo-Crowdsourcing: Bringing Volunteered Geographic...                    159


Over, M., Schilling, A., Neubauer, S., & Zipf, A. (2010). Generating web-based 3D city models

    from OpenStreetMap: The current situation in Germany. Computers, Environment and Urban
    Systems, 34 (6), 496–507.
 Sarjakoski, T. (1998). Networked GIS for public participation – Emphasis on utilizing image data.
    Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 22 (4), 381–392.

 Schilling, A., & Goetz, M. (2010). Decision support systems using 3D OGC services and indoor
    routing – Example scenario from the OWS-6 testbed . Paper presented at the 5th 3D GeoInfo
    conference, Berlin, Germany.
Schilling, A., Over, M., Neubauer, S., Neis, P., Walenciak, G., & Zipf, A. (2009).   Interoperable

    location based services for 3D cities on the web using user generated content from
    OpenStreetMap. Paper presented at the 27th urban data management symposium, Ljubljana,
    Slovenia.
Song, W., & Sun, G. (2010).     The role of mobile volunteered geographic information in urban

    management. Paper presented at the 18th international conference on geoinformatics, Beijing,
    China.
Tagwatch. (2011). Tagwatch planet-latest.    http://tagwatch.stoecker.eu/Planet-latest/En/tags.html.
    Accessed November 7, 2011.

Yang, P. P.-J., Putra, S. Y., & Li, W. (2007). Viewsphere: A GIS-based 3D visibility analysis for
    urban design evaluation.Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design, 34(6), 971–992.
 Ziegler, S. (2011). osm3d Viewer.  http://www.osm3d.org. Accessed November 7, 2011.
Zipf, A., Basanow, J., Neis, P., Neubauer, S., & Schilling, A. (2007).   Towards 3D spatial data

    infrastructures (3D-SDI) based on open standards – Experiences, results and future issues     .
    Paper presented at the 3D GeoInfo07, ISPRS WG IV/8 International Workshop on 3D Geo-
    information: Requirements, acquisition, modelling, analysis, visualisation, Delft, Netherlands.
   Chapter 10

From Volunteered Geographic Information

to Volunteered Geographic Services*


    Jim Thatcher









 Abstract Volunteered geographic information refersto a rangeof geo-collaboration
projects in which individuals voluntarily collect, maintain, and visualize informa-
tion. This chapter introduces the related, but distinct, concept of volunteered geo-
graphic services (VGS). VGS is based on the organization and exchange of discrete

actions through mobile spatially aware devices like smartphones. VGS attempts to
extend the limits of VGI by directly linking users together through time and space.
VGS’ potential uses in crisis response are considered in light of VGI’s successful
role in recent crises. A speciﬁc implementation of VGS, created by the PSUmobile.
org team, is presented in detail.




     10.1     Introduction


As this volume attests, volunteered geographic information has become the subject of
signiﬁcant study since its coining in 2007 (Goodch2007). As a special, geographic
case of the more general Web 2.0 phenomenon of user-generated content, VGI as a
ﬁeld of study has remained centered around large-group, collaborative mapping and

visualization projects like OpenStreetMap and Ushahidi. While many studies have
focused on improving the use, understanding, or accuracy of volunteered geographic
information, utilizations have remained focused on information as distinct and
separated from action. Services like Ushahidi are used in crisis mapping to aggregate,
correlate, and present information in a manner useful to rescue services (Morrow et al.

2011). Studies such as those of Zook et al.2(010) and Goodchild and Glenno(010 )


*The term volunteered geographic services was coined by Krzysztof Janowicz. The PSUmobile.
org project was also headed by Krzysztof (psumobile.org/).
  J. Thatc*er) (
  Department of Geography, Clark University, PA , USA
e-mail: jethatcher@gmail.com


D. Sui et al. (eds.), Crowdsourcing Geographic Knowledge: Volunteered Geographic
Information (VGI) in Theory and Practice, DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-4587-2_10,
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
162                                                                        J. Thatcher


have examined the accuracy and efﬁcacy of volunteered geographic information
(VGI) in crisis situations. There remains an oft-unstated separation of information and
action. VGI applications gather and (re)present geographic information from the
ground up, but decision making and action coordination are left outside of the system

(Savelyev et al.2011; Thatcher et al.2011 ) .
   This chapter presents a framework to move VGI beyond information and into an
integrated system of coordinated, ground-up actions. Volunteered geographic ser-
vices (VGS) collapse the conceptual distance between information representation
and action. Present implementations of VGI, such as Ushahidi, are platforms for the

provision or analysis of data. The appropriate action may be decided due to this
information, but it is not decided through the VGI system. VGS, on the other hand,
crowd-sources micro-transactions allowing users on the ground to coordinate and
initiate requests for and offers of aid. This chapter will present an open-source
implementation of VGS by the PSUmobile.org team of designers and developers.
The concept of VGS, of directly linking providers and receivers of services through

space, is of wide utility. For example, although the PSUmobile.org implementation
of VGS focuses on the non-monetary exchange of aid during crises, a VGS system
could be used as a geospatially referenced market for the exchange of any broadly
deﬁned “good,” legal, or otherwise. Throughout this chapter, VGS refers to the con-
cept of volunteered geographic services as distinct from volunteered geographic

information, while the speciﬁc implementation is referred to as the PSUmobile.org
implementation for clarity.
   In making the case for volunteered geographic services, this chapter ﬁrst reviews
recent literature on volunteered geographic information. VGI’s recent use in crisis
response, where reliable, powerful tools for emergency response have been developed

and deployed, is situated as the groundwork for a system of actions.      Two potential
uses of a VGS system are presented and then the PSUMobile.org implementation of
VGS is described in detail. Finally, VGS is brieﬂy considered within the context of
existing VGI applications. Potential problems and dangers of VGS are discussed as
issues for future research, addressing the relationship between information and action

within an increasingly geospatially aware society. As the ability to locate oneself and
communicate with others becomes increasingly mediated through mobile technology,
the relationship between what is known and what can be done is of increasing impor-
tance. This chapter concludes by reiterating that VGS is meant to replace neither VGI
nor traditional crisis-response infrastructure but as a complement to the two.



10.2 VGI and Web 2.0: A Shift in Creator,

        Presenter, and Interpreter


The increased availability, use, and study of volunteered geographic information can
be seen as part and parcel of the coming together of two disparate trends. On the one
hand, new geospatial technologies allow individual users to place their physical
location within an abstract system of location. The knowledge acquisition, appltioan,
10  From Volunteered Geographic Information to Volunteered Geographic Services     163


and provision allowed through the emerging geospatial infrastructure have broad
applications in the academic (Yang et al. 2010 ) , public (Kingsto    2007; Ruiz and
Remmert2004), and private (Francica2012) worlds. While the long process and sup-

porting technologies that led to the creation of modern geospatial infrastructures and
technologies, like GPS, cannot be addressed here, it is important to note that their
creation allows for placing of individual location within a globalized imperfescytstem
(Schuurman   2009). On the other hand, VGI never achieves importance wo    iht the rise
of the user-created and user-shared information that lies at the heart of “Web 2.0.”

   Although there is disagreement on its exact deﬁnition, in this chapter, “Web 2.0”
refers to an ethos of sharing that has been coupled with O’Reilly’s2(005 ) “Web 2.0”
environment in which “network technologies are used to leverage the potential
contributions of a wide variety of users” (Flanagin and Metzger 2008 ) . The rapid
increase in online users creating and sharing information, up to 35% of all users

according to Lenhart (2006) and likely much higher today, is coupled intrinsically
with tools created to harness this desire andsimplify the process. “Web 2.0” projects
like Wikipedia cannot succeed without user creation and sharing of information,
but, at the same time, they are also entirely reliant upon networked technologies that
allow for this creation and sharing.

   VGI emerges as geospatial technologies and Web 2.0 designs and implementa-
tions are incorporated. For this reason, VGI can be seen as a special case of Web 2.0
itself (Goodchild 2007). While technology is necessary in order to produce the
location-based information, technology is just as necessary for its interpretation,
visualization, and sharing. Users are now presented with simpliﬁed, easy-to-use

tools for the creation, display, and interpretation of geospatial data (Crampton2009 ;
Tsou 2011). While many of these tools (AJAX, XML, Ruby on Rails, etc.) were
developed for Web 2.0 applications, the emphasis on ease of use andﬂexible
structures has beneﬁted geographic Web applications as well. This has resulted in a

host of “mash-ups” as various forms of digital information are combined witg   hrgeoic
information over a base layer (Darlin 2005 ) . Application programming interfaces
(APIs) like Google Maps and Bing Maps allowusers ready access to alargedatabase
of satellite images, roads, addresses, and other cartographic information previously
unavailable or available only to professionals.

   While corporate provision of the most common APIs has raised questions related
to the control of visibility, the creation of “god’s eye views” of reality, and other criti-
cal issues, their present availability provides GeoWeb users with the ability to link
almost any type of digital content with geo-temporal information (Zook and Graham
2007; Schuurman 2009; Kingsbury and Jones 2009 ) . As geospatial technologies

become mobile and ubiquitous with their inclusion in smartphones, new dimensions
of interaction, mobility, and knowledge are created as design, technology, and daily
life coalesce in new ways (Dave   2007; Roche et al. 2011 ) . Geospatial information,
and particularly the use of mobile geospatially enabled devices, allows individuals to
know a place without physical presence (Sutko and de Souza e Silva2011 ) . As users

become the drivers of uses and applications of geospatial information, the deﬁnition
of creator, presenter, and interpreter shifts along with the emphasis on shared and
volunteered information of Web 2.0. Volunteered geographic information, as a ﬁeld
164                                                                         J. Thatcher


of study, addresses the potential scientiﬁc ansdocietal changes of thise relationship
between producer and consumer of geographic information, or what Budhathoki
et al. (2008) has termed the “produser” (Sui 2008; Elwood 2010 ) .




   10.3       Inspiration for VGS: VGI and Crisis Response

When considered as any application “in which people, either individually or col-

lectively, voluntarily collect, organize and/or disseminate geographic information”
for use by others, VGI has widespread utility (Tulloch 2008). Similarly, VGS – the
ability to geospatially link individual users based on possession of or desire for any
broadly deﬁned service – has a similar breadth of potential uses. VGS, unlike VGI,
is explicitly focused on action. Volunteered geographic information is contained in
any VGS application, but VGS takes the additional step of linking, through time and

space, individual exchange of services. The inspiration for VGS lies in VGI’s usage
in crisis response and management. This section explores the background of VGS
in relation to VGI’s use and limitations in crisis response. The section begins by
arguing that while VGI may never replace traditional,ﬁnite, and veriﬁed data
sources, it can effectively augment crisis management. Further, while VGI can

serve as an asset for traditional crisis responders and managers, the PSUmobile.org
implementation of VGS provides a framework in which the ability to respond lies
in the hands of groups on the ground. This collapses the conceptual distance between
information representation and action while, at the same time, removing the one-
to-many, many-to-one bottleneck of traditional crisis responders.

   VGI has been used in the management and response of many qualitatively dif-
ferent types of crisis: forestﬁres (Goodchild and Glennon          2010 ) , hurricanes
(Miller2006), earthquakes (Zook et a2 l.010; Morrow et al.2011 ) , ﬂ oods (M2  il0r6 ) ,
riots (Presley 2011), and other natural and man-made disasters (Palen et al. 2009 ;
Parry 2011). In many of these situations, VGI provided access to the up-to-date

information that responders need in the early stages of crisis management (De
Longueville et al. 2010; Roche et al. 2011). Despite successes, research has found
crisis responders resistant to incorporating VGI data into their decisions (Zerger
and Smith 2003). One potential cause is VGI’s perceived problems with valida-
tion and veriﬁcation. Ofﬁcial responders, who are held legally liable for crisis
response, are reticent to rely wholly upon user-generated content where erroneous

data can lead to loss of life (Ostermann and Spinsanti    2011; Burgener 2004 ) . In
fact, NGOs have been found to be far more likely to utilize VGI data than ofﬁcial
responders (Roche et al. 2011 ) .
   VGS is an attempt to push beyond the limits of VGI with respect to crises in two
related ways. First, present crisis management responses that utilize VGI do so from

a top-down perspective: Information is gathered from individual users but is then
ﬁltered upwards and (re)presented to key decision makers. In many ways, this is
consistent with a view of information technology as a tool for enhancing the control
and release of information (Zook et al.    2010). Ushahidi, for example, gathered
and veriﬁed information at distant centers during the Haitian earthquake response.
10  From Volunteered Geographic Information to Volunteered Geographic Services   165


A similar platform was run out of Tufts University after the Tokyo earthquake
(Naone 2011). While this information was predominantly veriﬁed through the work
of volunteers, it remained centralized and veriﬁed far from the immediate locale of
action (Morrow et al. 2011). On the one hand, this showcases VGI’s ability to allow

remote users to offer aid through digital means (Sui and Delyser              2012 ) .
OpenStreetMap’s rapid increase in editing and updating of digital information dur-
ing the Haitian Earthquake attests to this ability (Zook et al. 2010 ) . On the other
hand, the embedded individual actor experiencing the crisis can become lost in the
digital centralization and representation of VGI.

   While Ushahidi allows individuals on the ground to upload information about
needed services, it provides no means by which individuals may provide those
services to each other: A user may requesﬁt rst aid equipment, andhis or herneighbor
may have such equipment available; however, the Ushahidi platform in its current
incarnation connects these local needs only through a centralized representation.
Present implementations of VGI lack the ability to link users directly through time

and space. Although this ability could easily be added to any given implementation,
it represents a concept distinct from present deﬁnitions of VGI. As a concept, VGI
is concerned with data and information both in its gathering and presentation
(Goodchild 2007; Tulloch 2008; Agrios and Mann 2010; Zook et al. 2010 ) . With
this focus, a gap emerges between information and action. VGI aids in the accumu-

lation and dissemination of data necessary to make decisions, but the decisions are
organized outside of present VGI implementations. For example, in a traditional
VGI system like Ushahidi, if multiple requests for ﬁrst aid or evacuation occur in a
given area, an NGO or government agency could decide to allocate resources to that
area. Resource allocation and action still occur outside of the VGI system. This gap

removes actors on the ground from decision-making processes even as the infortm  ioan
they provide is used for these decisions.
   VGS attempts to address both the gap between information and action and the
top-down nature of present VGI implementations. As a concept, it refers to a system
that crowd-sources and coordinates micro-transactions. In a crisis, this allows on-

the-ground citizens to organize and allocate available resources directly. It follows
from research that suggests that on-the-ground actors often have more invested in
immediate response and must be included in crisis management. It is meant tom  auent
traditional crisis management and response through new mobile technology. Pushing
VGI beyond its limits, VGS goes from the “rise of local expertise to replace central-
ization” of information to that of action (Goodchild2008). In the following section,

two potential uses of VGS are presented.



   10.4      Volunteered Geographic Services: The General
         Case for Use and Two Examples


As a concept, VGS is not limited to crisis response. It entails any system where
volunteered geographic information is coupled directly to an exchange of services,
broadly deﬁned. The particular PSUMobile.org implementation is meant for use in
166                                                                       J. Thatcher


crises where micro-transactions can have a signiﬁcant positive effect. The following
two examples present situations in which the immediate allocation of an available
resource by actors on the ground is sufﬁcient. The ﬁrst example is of an everyday
use of the PSUmobile.org implementation of VGS, while the second focuses on use

in a more immediate emergency.




   10.4.1       Plowing the Driveway During a Snow Storm

In the northeast of the United States, it is not uncommon to encounter severe

snowstorms of 12–14 in.of snow in a single day. As anyone living in the area can
attest, removing the snow from a driveway is both necessary and time consuming.
Traditionally, residents either remove the snow themselves or rely upon neighbors
or local plows for aid. The PSUmobile.org implementation of VGS can help re    dseints
organize for time-efﬁcient snow removal.
   First, a resident in a hurry and without a snowplow can send out a spatially and

temporally speciﬁc request for assistance (Sect.   10.2). Second, a resident with a
snowplow could make an offer of aid to which residents in need could then respond.
In each situation, the VGS application used will then display all offers and requests
to other users using appropriate (and adjustable) spatial and temporal ﬁlters.
   While in many ways trivial, this situation demonstrates the ability to facilitate

micro-transactions of aid in everyday life. This is done in real time without the need
of any professionally veriﬁed information or assignments of assistance to locate and
match users in time and space.




   10.4.2       Coordinating Flood Evacuation


According to the US National Research Council, geospatial data and tools should
be, but often are not, used in all aspects of emergency management (NRC2007 ) . As
VGI continues toﬁnd its way into crisis response, it remains used to acquire and
present up-to-date data from the dynamic situations on the ground (Goodchild
and Glennon 2010; Zook et al. 2010; Parry 2011). While this data is critical for

coordination and response, the support bottleneck remains: Actions are coordinated
through top-down, ofﬁcial channels. VGS systems, like the PSUmobile.org imm    pleen-
tation, present a potential solution to this constraint as they ad hoccoordination
of micro-services by individuals on the ground. The following describes a potential
use of a VGS in a ﬂood situation.

   Regardless of ﬂood severity, those in the path of ﬂoodwaters need to acquire or
arrange for transportation to safer ground. In such situations, transportation routes
and availability may change from moment to moment, making any sort of ofﬁcial
decision potentially inadequate to the shifting situation on the ground. Further,
10  From Volunteered Geographic Information to Volunteered Geographic Services  167


while mass evacuation may at times be necessary, individuals may need to relocate
as well.
   The PSUmobile.org implementation of VGS would allow for individuals to
request and offer immediate transportation solutions. For example, if a resident with

a truck was leaving his neighborhood and had room for additional passengers, they
would post an offer of transportation that would be viewable by users within the
immediate vicinity. Likewise, a user in need of transportation can make requests
viewable by all other users in the appropriate area (Sect.10.2). The PSUmobile.org
implementation of VGS contains spatial and temporalﬁlters that allow those

requesting aid to be appropriately matched with those offering it. The Linked Data
model of the PSUMobile.org implementation allows an individual to respond to a
request for aid and be automatically linked to multiple users in similar situations
(Sect. 10.1 ).
   In the situation of a ﬂood, or any other event where individuals need to rapidly
coordinate movement, the removal of top-down coordination allows response to

match the rapidly shifting circumstances on the ground. The removal of external
veriﬁcation and organization opens VGS to several potential problems discussed in
Sect. 10.6; however, it is clear that VGS, through its ability to connect users at
appropriate spatial and temporal scales, offers signiﬁcant opportunities foauegnting
crisis response.




   10.5      The PSUmobile.org VGS Implementation


This section describes the speciﬁc implementation of VGS by the PSUmobile.org
team. The server is described ﬁrst and represents an open-source platform capable
of easy integration with existing applications and data sources. The client is
described second and represents one possible implementation of the server and,
more broadly, of VGS itself. The descriptions offered here are meant to familiarize

the reader with how VGS might w   ork; technical speciﬁcationsof the implementation
are available in the paper by Savelyev et al. (2011 ) .



   10.5.1      The Server


As the backbone of the implementation, the server provides a framework for diverse
implementations of the VGS concept that address various user communities and
purposes. A generic request-offer messaging bus based on a Linked Data model
handles all requests, offers, users, and their related elements in an open manner

which allows for their combination with other sources (Bizer et al.2009 ) . The client
is just a single implementation that uses the server infrastructure.
   Within the implementation, an offer of help may be answered by a request and
vice versa; however, in addition to one-to-one matching, a request may attach
168                                                                           J. Thatcher


itself to another request or an offer to another, related, offer. If one user needed
transportation during a ﬂood (see Sect. 10.2), another user also in need of trans-
portation may “add” himself or herself to the existing request rather than creating

a unique request (Sect.   4.2explains this process). These requests (or offers) rein-
force existing requests (and offers) and are therefore not considered unique
requests in their own right. The term “action” is used to generically refer to all
requests, offers, and their interlinkages.

   In the Linked Data model used by the server, actions contain all of the interac-
tions between requests and users as well as a variety of possible metadata. Actions
may contain user identiﬁcation, the location of the user, the location the action refers
to, the time of creation for the action, and the time of expiration of the action, as

well as the textual content of the message. The VGS framework ontology does not
model this metadata, as diverse implementations of VGS may require all, some, or
even additional types of metadata. Avoiding a formalized framework for metadata
allows each implementation to create the necessary ontology for its intended use.
Each VGS implementation may require its own application-level ontology to parse

this metadata, while the implementation framework manages requests, offers, and
associated information from the server side.
   On the server side, each action receives a unique identiﬁer. This assigned unique
identiﬁer is then associated with all related offers, requests, and attached actions

following the Linked Data paradigm (Bizer et al.        2009). The server provides a
generic, adaptable, and robust means of handling all requests and offers for service
as well as connections between these actions. For a complete description of the
present server implementation, including server-side ontologies, the Service Bus
Implementation, and Web Service model, see the paper by Savelyev et al.( 2011 )

from which this section draws heavily.



   10.5.2       The Android Client

While the server implementation and its associated Web Service is the generic back-

bone for all VGS implementations discussed here, the client is a speciﬁc application
developed for the Android platform to interface with the VGS server system. The
mobile client allows users to browse existing actions, submit new actions, and respond
to existing actions through its graphical interface. Here an “action” refers to the user-

initiated request for or offer of help. Although, as discussed above, the framework
handles all action metadata generically, this speciﬁc implementation parses the user
name, title of the action, action description, geolocation, and time of creation.
   The client implementation has four screen views in the present implementation –
the default GUI for browsing existing actions (Fig.      10.1a), a screen to submit a

request or offer (Fig. 10.1b), a “detailed action view” that allows users to conﬁrm
requests or offer help to the viewed request (Fig. 10.1c), and a screen to conﬁrm an
offer to fulﬁll an existing request or offer (Fig. 10.1d ).

 1
 Image created by Thatcher et al. (2011 ) .
10  From Volunteered Geographic Information to Volunteered Geographic Services      169


















 Fig. 10.1 Activity screens of the PSUmobile VGS App


   Upon initialization, the client acquired the device’s location viaGPS and presents
the user with the “home” screen (Fig  1.0.1a). From this screen, three potential ftions

of the VGS application (to offer help, to request help, or to conﬁrm an offer or
request) diverge.
   To send a request, the user presses the “Create Request” button in the lower
right-hand corner of the screen (the blue circle with a plus sign in Fig. 10.1a ). To

offer help, the user selects a request bubble from the map view and is taken to the
“detailed action” screen (Fig. 10.1c). In the present build of the client, the ability to
offer a service not in response to an existing request is not initialized.
   The “home” screen also allows users toﬁlter requests and offers by time and
space. Filtering by space is accomplished through panning and zooming the map,

while temporal ﬁlters are visible at the top, allowing users to step through time by
ten requests. For a critical discussion of this design and its ramiﬁcations, see the
paper by Thatcher et al. (2011 ) .
   Creating a request takes the user to Fig. 10.1b. This screen offers three ﬁelds –

request title, request description, and the user’s name. Pressing the “Go!” button
sends the request to the server via an HTTP transmission. The user may also “sign
in” to his or her user account from this screen. The process for requesting help was
intentionally kept simple to allow for rapid publication in times of stress.
   Users offer to fulﬁll requests from Fig.    10.1c. This screen contains all of the

information gathered from the request submission and offers the user two choices:
A “thumbs-up” hand symbol conﬁrms the request, linking the user to the request
and denoting that he or she also requires the same service. This serves both to legiti-
mize the request and to allow those offering aid to rapidly determine how many

people in a given area require a service. Pressing the “shovel” button takes the user
to the Send Offer screen (Fig. 10.1d), where the user conﬁrms that he or she is able
to provide the requested service. When complete, the offer and request are linked
together in the server database (Sect. 10.1 ).

   Through the Google Map API and the four screens in Fig. 10.1, users may view
offers and requests using temporal and spatial ﬁlters. Simple, rapid interactions link
170                                                                       J. Thatcher


offers and requests together on the sevr. Although thepresent clientimplementation
is simple and lacks robust features, it demonstrates the strength and versatility of
both the VGS concept and the server implementation.




   10.6      Summary and Concluding Remarks

This short chapter has introduced the concept of volunteered geographic services

and situated it within the larger framework of VGI. While its inspiration and present
implementation stem from crisis response, the framework presented can effectively
manage a host of potential applications as it provides a generic infrastructure for the
storing, retrieving, and linking of human services. Using the Linked Data paradigm
and semantic Web technologies, the concept of VGS is supported with a robust
server implementation (Savelyev et al.    2011). The software is open source and

encourages outside contributions; the latest builds are available at  http://vgs.svn.
sourceforge.net/viewvc/vgs/ .
   VGS is distinct from present considerations of VGI as it collapses the conceptual
distance between gathering and presenting geospatial information and acting within
geographic contexts. The PSUmobile.org implementation supports a framework by

which end users can coordinate micro-service transactions in a variety of contexts.
The client is one application of VGS and is meant as a proof of concept rather than
a deﬁnitive tool. The varied uses to which existing VGI applications have been put
demonstrate their ability to incorporate new uses like V GS; however, it would be
necessary to shift the focus from aggreg ation and presentation of information to

on-the-ground ad hoc coordination of action. At present, services like Ushahidi’s
SwiftRiver platform retain an intrinsic block between information display and crisis
response. This separation allows for remote users to aid in crisis response and offers
the opportunity to verify information. In the future, the repurposing of existing and
proven tools may be necessary as VGS demonstrates its value in augmenting VGI.

   Before any large-scale adoption, it is necessary to consider some potential issues
created in the use of VGS systems. First, much like VGI, VGS faces potential threats
of spam and fraudulent posting. Simple location speciﬁcity is not enough to address the
“context deﬁcit” of digital information as location may be spoofed using a variety of
means (Eysenbach2008). This becomes an acute issue in situations of crisis response,
and although literature has highlighted VGI’s successful use in crises, VGS has yet to

be examined (Flanagin and Metzger2008; Goodchild and Glennon2010; Zook et al.
2010; Roche et al. 2011). Recent work suggests that implementation of automated
location-based trust and reputation models can have some success, but testing with
VGS applications is necessary (Bishr and Mantela2  s008; Bishr and Janowicz2010 ) .
   In addition to fraud and spam, the VGS system faces the difﬁculty of illicit, but

sincere, uses. Like many frameworks that allow for the creation and exchange of
information, the PSUmobile.org framework could easily be used for illegal or
harmful purposes. Unlike situations in which only information is exchanged, the
  10  From Volunteered Geographic Information to Volunteered Geographic Services        171


  concept of VGS itself implies action and so further entangles the system in a set of
  logistic and ethical questions.
     Finally, it is critical to reiterate that VGS systems are not meant to replace traditional

  crisis-response systems but to augment them. In crisis situations, ofﬁcial managers often
  defer to paper-based maps rather than the more recent, but potentially less accurate,
  digital ones (Roche et al. 2011). Ofﬁcial responders are legally liable for their actions
  and so require validated information, something that VGI and VGS may not always

  provide (Tulloch2008). VGS systems cannot fully replace ofﬁcial response to disasters;
  they are not top-down architectures that allow for the type of control and response
  necessary for legalliability. Further, they inherently function at the level of individuals;

  while useful (Sect. 10.4), this mode of functionality cannot allocate and mobilize
  resources on the massive scales that disaster response necessitates.
     VGI and VGS can also never fully address issues of unequal socioeconomic

  access to digital communication or uneven loss of access during crises. VGS
  removes the bottleneck of decision making for immediate, on-the-ground micro-
  transactions. It is not meant to coordinate the deployment of thousands of sandbags

  along a breaking levee but, rather, to enable those individuals most affected by a
  crisis to organize themselves in small, but signiﬁcant, ways. Rather than another
  tool to integrate new information into ofﬁcially veriﬁed, known, and ﬁnite data sets,

  VGS allows local actors, those most often affected by emergencies, to become
  decision makers (Elwood2008). The micro-services coordinated by the PSUmobile.
  org implementation and conceptualized in VGS present a small step towards the
  bottom-up organization of crisis response.


   Acknowledgements The author acknowledges the entire PSUMobile.org team and particularly
  Krzysztof Janowicz, Alexander Savelyev, Wei Luo, Sen Xu, Christoph Mulligann, and Elaine
  Guidero, without whom this project could not exist. Madelynn von Baeyer and Courtney Thatcher
  are thanked for early edits and encouragement.




    References


  Agrios, B., & Mann, K. (2010). Getting in touch with volunteered geographic information: Use a
     Javascript API live samples to build a web editing application.ttp://www.esri.com/news/
     arcuser/0610/vgi-tutorial.htmlAccessed February 2, 2012.
  Bishr, M., & Janowicz, K. (2010). Can we trust information? The case of volunteered geographic
     information (Vol. 640). In Towards a digital earth search discover and share geospatial data

     workshop at future internet symposium , CEUR-WS.
  Bishr, M., & Mantelas, L. (2008). A trust and reputation model for ﬁltering and classifying knowl-
     edge about urban growth. GeoJournal, 72 (3–4), 229–237.
  Bizer, C., Heath, T., & Berners-Lee, T. (2009). Linked data – The story so faIrn.ternational Journal
     on Semantic Web and Information Systems, 5 (3), 1–22.
  Budhathoki, N. R., Bruce, B., & Nedovic-Budic, Z. (2008). Reconceptualizing the role of the user
     of spatial data infrastructure. GeoJournal, 72 , 149–160.
Burgener, E. (2004). Assessing the foundation of long distance disaster recovery. Computer
     Technology Review, 24 (5), 24–25.
  172                                                                                   J. Thatcher


  Crampton, J. (2009). Cartography: Maps 2.0. Progress in Human Geography, 33 (1), 91–100.

 Darlin, D. (2005). A journey to a thousand maps begins with an open code.        New York Times
     Online .   http://www.nytimes.com/2005/10/20/technology/circuits/20maps.html.         Accessed
     February 1, 2012.
 Dave, B. (2007). Space, sociality and pervasive computing. Environment and Planning B, 34 (3),

     381–382.
  De Longueville, B., Annoni, A., Schade, S., Ostlaender, N., & Whitmore, C. (2010). Digital earth’s
     nervous system for crisis events: Real-time sensor web enablement of volunteered geographic
     information. International Journal of Digital Earth, 3 (3), 242–259.

 Elwood, S. (2008). Volunteered geographic information: Future research directions motivated by
     critical, participatory, and feminist GIS. GeoJournal, 72 , 173–183.
 Elwood, S. (2010). Geographic information science: Emerging research on the societal implica-
     tions of the geospatial web. Progress in Human Geography, 34 , 349–357.

 Eysenbach, G. (2008). Credibility of health information and digital media: New perspectives and
     implications for youth. In M. J. Metzger & A. J. Flanagin (Eds.),   Digitla media, youth, and
     credibility. Cambridge: MIT Press.
 Flanagin, A. J., & Metzger, M. J. (2008). The credibility of volunteered geographic information.

     GeoJournal, 72 , 137–148.
  Francica, J. (2012). Geospatial data content licensing and marketing in the era of data as a service –
     An interview with James Cutler, CEO, emapsite.com. Directions Magazine .     http://www.direc-
     tionsmag.com/articles/geospatial-data-content-licensing-and-marketing-in-the-era-

     of-data-as-/227410 . Accessed February 1, 2012.
Goodchild, M. (2007). Citizens as sensors: The world of volunteered geography.        GeoJournal,
     69 (4), 211–221.
  Goodchild, M. (2008). Commentary: Whither VGI? GeoJournal, 72 , 239–244.

Goodchild, M., & Glennon, J. A. (2010). Crowdsourcing geographic information for disaster
     response: A research frontier. International Journal of Digital Earth, 3 (3), 231.
Kingsbury, P., & Jones, J. P., III. (2009). Walter Benjamin’s Dionysian adventures on Google
     Earth. Geoforum, 40 , 502–513.

 Kingston, R. (2007). Public participation in local policy decision-making: The role of web-based
     mapping. The Cartographic Journal, 44 (2), 138–144.
  Lenhart, A. (2006). User-generated content. Pew Internet & American Life Project.ttp://pewiternet.
     org/Presentations/2006/UserGenerated-Content.aspx    . Accessed February 5, 2012.

Miller, C. (2006). A beast in theﬁeld: The Google maps mashup as GIS.          Cartographica, 41 ,
     1878–1899.
 Morrow, N., Mock, N., Papendieck, A., & Kocmich, N. (2011). Independent evaluation of the
     Ushahidi Haiti project. https://sites.google.com/site/haitiushahidieval/news/ ﬁ nalreportindepen

     dentevaluationoftheushahidihaitiproject . Accessed February 1, 2012.
 Naone, E. (2011). Internet activists mobilize for Japan.  Technology Review Published by MIT .
      http://www.technologyreview.com/communications/35097/. Accessed February 2, 2012.
    National Research Council. (200S7u)c.cessful response starts with a map: Improving geospatial

     support for disaster management. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
 O’Reilly, T. (2005). What is web 2.0 design patterns and business models for the next generation
     of software O’Reilly.com.     http://oreilly.com/web2/archive/what-is-web-20.html. Accessed
     February 1, 2012.

 Ostermann, F. O., & Spinsanti, L. (2011). A conceptual workﬂow for automatically assessing the
     quality of volunteered geographic information for crisis management. In Proceedings of Agile
     2011 , Utrecht.
  Palen, L., Vieweg, S., Liu, S. B., & Hughes, A. L. (2009). Crisis in a networked world: Features of

     computer-mediated communication in the April 16, 2007, Virginia Tech event. Social Science
     Computer Review, 27 (4), 467–480.
 Parry, M. (2011). Academics join relief efforts around the world as crisis mappers. The Chronicle
     of Higher Education, March 27, 2011.
 10   From Volunteered Geographic Information to Volunteered Geographic Services               173


Presley, S. (2011). Mapping out #LondonRiots. NFPvoice.         http://www.nfpvoice.com/2011/08/

     mapping-out-londonriots/  . Accessed February 1, 2012.
 Roche, S., Propeck-Zimmermann, E., & Mericskay, B. (2011). GeoWeb and crisis management:
     Issues and perspectives of volunteered geographic information.     GeoJournal . doi:  10.1007/
     s10708-011-9423-9   .

 Ruiz, M. O., & Remmert, D. (2004). A local department of public health and the geospatial data
     infrastructure. Journal of Medical Systems, 28 (4), 385–395.
 Savelyev, A., Janowicz, K., Thatcher, J., Xu, S., Mulligann, C., & Luo, W. (2011). Volunteered
     geographic services: Developing a linked data driven location-based service. InProceedings of

     SigSpatial: International Workshop on Spatial Semantics 2011 .
Schuurman, N. (2009). An interview with Michael Goodchild.          Environment and Planning D:
     Society and Space, 27 (4), 573–580.
 Sui, D. (2008). The wikiﬁcation of GIS and its consequences: Or Angelina Jolie’s new tattoo and

     the future of GIS. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 32 , 1–5.
 Sui, D., & DeLyser, D. (2012). Crossing the qualitative-quantitative chasm I: Hybrid geographies,
     the spatial turn, and volunteered geographic information (VGI).Progress in Human Geography,
     36 (1), 111–124.

  Sutko, D. M., & de Souza e Silva, A. (2011). Location-aware mobile media and urban sustainability.
     New Media Society, 13 , 807–823.
 Thatcher, J., Mulligann, C., Luo, W., Xu, S., Guidero, E., & Janowicz, K. (2011). Hidden ongtils –
     How mobile computing affects the conceptualization of geographic space.       Proceedings of

     Workshop on Cognitive Engineering for Mobile GIS 2011.
 Tsou, M. H. (2011). Revisiting web cartography in the United States: The rise of user-centered
     design. Cartography and Geographic Information Science, 38 (3), 249–256.
 Tulloch, D. L. (2008). Is VGI participation? From vernal pools to video games. GeoJournal, 72 ,

     161–171.
  Yang, C., Raskin, R., Goodchild, M., & Gahegan, M. (2010). Geospatial cyberinfrastructure: Past,
     present and future. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 34 (4), 264–277.
 Zerger, A., & Smith, D. I. (2003). Impediments to using GIS for real-time disaster decision sup-

     port. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 27 , 123–141.
  Zook, M., & Graham, M. (2007)M  . apping DigiPlace: Geocoded internet dataand therepresentation
     of place. Environment and Planning B, 34 , 466–482.
  Zook, M., Graham, M., Shelton, T., & Gorman, S. (2010). Volunteered geographic information and

     crowdsourcing disaster relief: A case study of Haitian Earthquake. World Medical & Health
     Policy, 2 (2), 231–341.
   Chapter 11

The Geographic Nature of Wikipedia

Authorship


    Darren    Hardy









 AbstractThe efﬁcacy and use of volunteered geographic information (VGI) is an
active research area, but the geography of VGI authorship is largely unknown.
Wikipedia is an online collaborative encyclopedia where anyone can edit articles,
including those about place. Moreover, Wikipedia’s editorial transparency facilitates

in situ observations of collective authorship. The empirical study described in this
chapter collects 32 million contributions to Wikipedia’s geographic articles over
7 years. It ﬁnds exponential decay in the spatial patterns of Wikipedia’s authorship
processes, which is consistent with other sociospatial phenomena, like innovation
diffusion. As global information infrastructures continue to reduce communication

and coordination costs, this study may provide insight into whether geographic
distance ultimately matters in information peer production. This chapter begins by
discussing core concepts behind collective authorship; then provides an overview of
Wikipedia, its contributors, and their production processes; discusses the results and

implications from spatial modeling of geotagged Wikipedia article contributions;
and concludes with future research issues.



       11.1     Introduction

A notable example of a widely popular system with volunteered geographic

information (VGI) capabilities is Wikipedia, an online collaborative encyclopedia.
Wiki technology provides simple methods for Web-based collective authorship
where anyone can contribute. Using this technolog,yWikipedia providesa large-scale
social computing system in which participants collectively author encyclopedic
information.



  D.   Hard)y (
Bren School of Environmental Science and Management, University of California,
 Santa Barbara , CA , USA
e-mail: dhardy@bren.ucsb.edu

D. Sui et al. (eds.), Crowdsourcing Geographic Knowledge: Volunteered Geographic
Information (VGI) in Theory and Practice, DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-4587-2_11,
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
176                                                                         D. Hardy


   Since 2001, Wikipedia has 17.5 million articles in 263 languages. Since March
2007, Alexa has ranked Wikipedia in the top 10 Internet sites. As of 23 February
2010, Wikipedia has 15 million articles in 272 languages with 860 million edits from
22 million contributors (Wikimedia   2010). During 2009 alone, Wikipedia had 365

million unique visitors that generated 133.6 billion page views (Zachte 2010a ) . Its
impact on the Web’s content is signiﬁcant. Fifty-one percent of its site visits come
from link-based search engine referrals (Alexa Internet, Inc. 2009 ) . Of those page
views that were referred to Wikipedia by external sites, 42% were referred by Google
search, maps, and other services, and 8% were made by Google’s “web-crawling”

software GoogleBot (Zachte2009). Over 1.2 million articles are place-based articles
(i.e., “geotagged”) (as of April 2011). These geotagged articles span dozens of lan-
guages and are accessible through geobrowsers and online mapping services.
   As the Internet itself grows, many describe it as place less—cyberspace without
place. Yet sociological researchers ﬁnd cultural differences in virtual communities
that mimic real-world environments, and a shared understanding of a virtual place

is a central determinant in such research. But today, any Internet user can get some
sense of place through rich interactive geovisualization technologies. “Slippy maps”
depict roads and buildings and other geographical features using simple point-
and-drag navigational and informational tools and even 3D imagery. Within these
online mapping interfaces, users may access a diverse set of VGI, including gteoged

Wikipedia articles and photographs.
   Yet, despite the advantages of the Internet for collaborative work, authors are
fundamentally engaged in knowledge production processes that are grounded in
social structures and norms, and in turn, physical place. Geographic distance, in
particular, should be a signiﬁcant factor in online knowledge production. But the

nature of the Internet in a globalized world has led to debate on whether geographic
distance matters (cf. Cairncross 1997 ; Friedman2005; Goodchild 2004 ; Marston
et al. 2005). That is, the Internet may redeﬁne the role of physical place in our lives
due to reduced communication costs and increased ubiquity. Zook(       2005, p. 54)
summarizes this debate as a new “geography of electronic spaces,” as the Internet

becomes “a recombinant space for political, cultural, and economic interaction.”
   This chapter focuses on information production methods and processes behind
geographic Wikipedia articles and discusses thenature of theseproduction processes.
For example, are contribution patterns similar between VGI and non-VGI content?
How do authors geotag articles? What is the geography of Wikipedia’s authorship?
What is the spatial distribution of articles and contributors, and how does physical

proximity inﬂuence contributions, either by article topic or language?



   11.2      Collective Authorship Processes


Collective authorship is one type of information production process—a mass
collective effort by individuals to produce information artifacts within a digital
commons. The term “information production” itself has different semantics across
11   The Geographic Nature of Wikipedia Authorship                                      177


disciplines. In the humanities, the term may represent the authoring of a written
work or book; in economics, market resources, or commodities, or perception, or
even a constitutive force in society (Browne 1997, p. 266); in library science, how

we communicate collaborative work to public scientiﬁc knowledge (Cronin             2001 ) ;
and, in social computing, collaborativeﬁltering or recommendation systems
(Beenen et al. 2004), blogging as community forums (Nardi et al.               2004 ) , and

user-generated tag clouds (Golder and Huberman 2006). For Wikipedia, the terms
wikinomics (Tapscott and Williams 2006), collective intelligence (O’Reilly 2005 ) ,
and crowdsourcing (Brabham 2008) all reﬂect the user-centric processes that drive

information production.
   And user-centric it is. Each month, over ten million authors contribute to
Wikipedia articles, roughly divided into two classes of contributors—a small, highly

productive set, then everyone else. The Web itself has a scale-free, power law distri-
bution in its link structure (Broder et al.    2000 ) and sur ﬁ ng behavior (Huberman
et al. 1998), and Wikipedia has them for both readership (Priedhorsky et al. 2007 )

and editing (Almeida et al. 2007; Kittur et al. 2007; Voss 2005 ) . For example, the
intensity of authorship shows that a small number of Wikipedia articles receive the
majority of edits, and the vast majority of articles receive a small number of edits
                    1
(i.e., the long tail).
   Wikipedia’s production processes are nontrivial, despite its perception in the
popular media as a loose or chaotic system. Wikipedia has many policies and

mechanisms to govern contributions, including rule-making, monitoring, conﬂict
resolution, and norms (Forte and Bruckman 2008; Lih 2009; Viégas et al. 2007a,
b). Its most well known policy is that contributors must write articles using a

neutral point of view, and this is a key discussion point between authors (e.g.,
Bryant et al. 2005; Viégas et al. 2004). As described by Wikipedia, neutral point
of view (NPOV) is “a fundamental Wikimedia principle and a cornerstone of

Wikipedia,” requiring that “all content [be] written from a neutral point of view,
representing fairly, proportionately, and as far as possible without bias, all
signiﬁcant views that have been published by reliable sources” (http://en.wikipedia.

org/wiki/NPOV ).
   The term Wikipedian does not have a strict deﬁnition, other than being a
contributor to a Wikipedia article generally. Registered, anonymous, administrative

Wikipedians and bots are the four basic types of contributorR     . egistered Wikipedians
create an account on Wikipedia, and their contributions are explicitly tagged in
the article history using their account. Anonymous Wikipedians do not provide any



 In scientiﬁc authorship, Lotska’s law predicts an inverse power relationshi, ~ n ) between
the number of authors n, the size of their contributions w, and a constant b. Zipf’s law is a refor-

mulation of this principle, generalized to individual contributions among group –bfort — i.e., the
rank r of an individual is proportional to the inverse of her contributions n (e.g., n ~ rda
et al.007 ) .
 Some have a more narrow deﬁnition of highly or consistently active contributors (Zachte2010b ) ,
but in this chapter, “Wikipedian” refers to any contributor to a Wikipedia article, regardless of
activity level.
178                                                                          D. Hardy


registration information, and their computer’s IP address is used in lieu of an
account. “Bots” and other administrative Wikipedians are both special cases of
registered accounts, but they have additional access or permissions to edit articles.

The overwhelming majority of Wikipedians do not collaborate with each other in a
traditional sense. They do not often discuss their contributions with others (Viégas
et al.2007a) and as such form a loosely collaborative, online collective authorship.
The most active segments of the Wikipedian population are 91,817 Wikipedians
with at least ﬁve contributions per month and 1,076,908 Wikipedians with at least

ten contributions total (Zachte2010b). The “long tail” has 21.1 million Wikipedians,
each of whom have less than ten contributions total.
   Although authorship processes are largely invisible to readers, the authors
themselves struggle to control article content around information types, responsi-
bility, perspectives, organization, or provenance and creation (Miller 2005 ; Sundin

and Haider 2007). Wikipedia provides complete article histories for those readers
wanting detailed authorship information.     WikiScanner, for example, is a data-
mining tool that extrapolates from article edit histories the location or afﬁliation
of anonymous authors (Grifﬁth       2007). But the utility of explicit authorship
information is debatable. As summarized by Viégas (2005, p. 61), on the one hand

explicit authorship information may be “an important part of social collaboration
in the sense that it adds context to interactions,” and on the other hand it may be
“irrelevant and sometimes even detrimental to the creation of truly communal
repositories of knowledge.”
   In fact, the success of Wikipediaand other “user-generated content”Web services

(O’Reilly 2005)has challenged academic theories of production. Benkler(        2002 )
argues that in terms of economic models of production, when the efﬁciency gains of
“peering” exceeds the costs of organizing human capital into aﬁrm or market, a
commons-based peer production system will emerge. Its advantage is based not

only on reduced costs of human capital and communications but also on the nonrival
aspects of Web-based information artifacts—i.e., many people can read (consume)
a webpage simultaneously without degrading its value. This effectively eliminates
allocation costs to consumers and increases the pool of potential contributors, which
mitigates effects from free riders.

   When applied to geographic information production, these factors will likely
challenge the “knowledge politics” of spatial data infrastructures (Elwood
2010). For example, they may weaken traditional notions of authoritative
sources as the collective social production of spatial information increases
(Budhathoki et al. 2008; Coleman et al. 2009; Sieber and Rahemtulla 2010 ) . As

Sui ( 2008, p. 4) argues, the “wikiﬁcation of GIS is perhaps one of the most
exciting, and indeed revolutionary developments since the invention of [GIS]
technology in the early 1960s.” Moreover, Wikipedia’s editorial patterns in the
production of VGI content are similar to those for nongeographic content. That
is, each of the four types of contributors exhibits editorial patterns that are

systematic when contributing to geographic articles, but idiosyncratic across
languages (Hardy 2008 ) .
11  The Geographic Nature of Wikipedia Authorship                           179


 Table 11.1Example geotag formats for University of California, Santa Barbara (UCSB; approx.
34.41°N, 119.85°W)
                 (a)Template:Coord anTemplate:Infobox in Wikipedia
UC Santa Barbara {{coord|34|24|35|N|119|50|59|W}}
UC Santa Barbara {{coord|34.41254|−119.84813|displ         =title|type:edu}}

{{Infobox_University |name=UC Santa Barbara
    |latd                       =34 |latm=24 |lats=35 |latNS=N
    |longd                       =119 |longm=50 |longs=59 |longEW=W
...}}
                 (b) Geo microformat for HTML (Çelik5 )

<DIV CLASS=“geo”>UC Santa Barbara
  <SPANLASS       =“latitude”>34.41</SPAN>,
  <SPANLASS       =“longitude”>−119.85</SPAN>
</DIV>
                 (c) Dublin Core metadata for HTML (Kunze9 )

<META NAME=“DC.title”       CONTENT       =“UC Santa Barbara” />
<META NAME=“DC.coverage.x” CONTENT=“−119.85”/>
<META NAME=“DC.coverage.y” CONTENT=“34.41”/>
                 (d) Geo metadata for HTML (Daviel and Kaegi )
<META NAME=“geo.position” CONTENT =“34.41;−119.85”/>

<META NAME=“geo.placename” CONTENT=“UC Santa Barbara” />
<META NAME=“geo.region” CONTENT           =“US-CA” />



   11.3     Volunteered Geographic Information in Wikipedia


Now, we turn to the speciﬁc types of geographic information produced through col-
lective authorship in Wikipedia. Geographic information, in general, informs us about

thewhere of things. It is spatial information about a phenomenon’s distribution in our
geographic world (Goodchild2000 )G . eoreferencingis the set of methods for deﬁning
a geographic location on the globe (Hill 2006 ) , deotaggingassigns geographic

locations to content (Amitay et al.2004), referring to “tagging” georeferenced meta-
data to a document or other content. A geotag may contain geographic coordinates,
extent, shape, or feature type information. A useful geometry for cataloguing georef-

erenced content is the minimum-bounding rectangle, which is the smallest rectangle
aligned with the coordinate axes that spans all coordinates for a given location.
   Wikipedia primarily uses single points and bounding rectangles rather than ﬁne-

resolution polygons in its geotagging processes. In this case, a geotag contains
simple geographic coordinates for latitude and longitude, and this georeferenced
information is embedded into articles using one of many microformats and

extensions to Wikitext, Wikipedia’s content markup language. For example, the
Template:Coord    anndfobox Wikitext templates accept point coordinates (Wikipedia.
org 2008). In fact, there are dozens of ways to include geographic coordinates in an

article. There is not a single “geotag” standard or format for Wikipedia, or the Web
for that matter (Table 11.1 ).
   The geotagging process itself in Wikipedia is haphazard. Wikipedia startitlic

using structured geotagging in February 2005 when geotags were introduced into
180                                                                            D. Hardy


Wikipedia in 2005 by Egil Kvaleberg’s gisextension to MediaWiki. Some authors

create geotags manually using a reference digital o praper map to estimatecoordinates,
while others resolve toponyms based on existing online gazetteers. Alternatively,
bots perform a bulk of the automated geotagging based on    GEOnet Names Server, an
online gazetteer, and run periodically. This process also adds geographic feature type

(i.e., city, river, mountain, etc.) when it is available from the gazetteer.
   The vast majority of geotagging is reportedly done by a variety of bots (Kühn and
Alder 2008), and their ad hoc nature ultimately makes it more difﬁcult to extract
geotags from articles. For example, a semiautomated bo    tnomebot2 runsperiodically

to geotag articles or mark those that mayneed a geotag. It cross-references named
entities in over 100,000 article titles with online gazetteer servics.hese botsprovide
a structural mechanism to integrate existing geographic data sources into articles.
But they are not semantic in nature, nor do they generate standardized markup

(Table11.1). In fact, they increase the complexity of extracting structured geographic
information from articles because of their chaotic, ad hoc nature and that of the
Wikitext markup and templates themselves (Sauer et al.2007). The end result is that
geotag extraction requires ad hoc or data-mining approaches to deal with the nonde-

terministic, semistructured nature of article templates anadd hoc inclusion ofgeotags.
But, anecdotally, some claim the majority of geotags were created manually and
not via automated processes (T. Alder, 22 April 2008, personal communication).
This further obscures the lineage of these geographic coordinate data.

   To index place-based articles, the Wikipedia-Worldproject creates a catalog of
geotagged articles (Kühn and Alder2008 ) . Since geotaggin     ingWikipediais chaotic,
this process relies on data-mining methods and is largely heuristic (Fig.     11.1 ). In

May 2008, this process found 1,163,797 geotagged articles across 230 languages
and 234,474 unique locations (at 1 km resolution). Wikipedia-World uses these data
to provide various online mapping services and exports the underlying geographic
data as database tables. And the index of place-based articles is growing rapidly.

In May 2011, the same process found 1.7 million geotagged articles across 273
languages and 1.1 million unique locations (at 1 km resolution, Fig. 11.2 ).




   11.4       Geography of Authorship


In systems like Flickr and Wikipedia, VGI content itself is spatially clustered (Hecht and
Gergle2010), and Wikipedia articles are also more likely to link to articles about places

nearby (Hecht and Moxley2009). But the literature does not directly address whether


 3
 These services includeGEOnet Names Server (GNS) andGeographic Names Information System
(GNIS) ( http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:The_Anomebot2). Using gazetteers as data sources is
common for these automated processes, but there are other data sources in use.Rambot, for exam-
ple, uses its own database of 3,141 counties and 33,832 cities to create geographic articles (
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User_talk:Rambot.
11  The Geographic Nature of Wikipedia Authorship                                    181































































 Fig. 11.1Detailed workﬂow for geotag data-mining software (Reprinted from Kühn 2008 )
182                                                                          D. Hardy





















 Fig. 11.2Spatial distribution of geotagged Wikipedia articles, visualized using log-scale density
for number of article contributions at 10 km resolution




VGI production processes themselves exhibit regular spatial patterns. This section will
discuss a spatial model for contributions, and results that show anonymous contributors
exhibit geographic effects that ﬁt an exponential distance decay function.




   11.4.1       Data Collection


Wikipedia manages hundreds of individual language-speciﬁc databases across three
data centers in the United States, Netherlands, and South Korea. Their services use
open-source MediaWiki software and data models (MediaWiki 2006 ) . Wikipedia

provides article and metadata via periodic dumps of their database and as static
HTML ﬁ les h(ttp://meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/Data_dumps       ), but historically, these
data do not always include complete article contribution records due to their volume
and limited operational resources (e.g., the August 2008 dump of the English
Wikipedia had 2.5 million articles and 250 million contributions— http://en.wikipedia.

org/wiki/Special:Statistics ).
   The openness of their data lends itself to empirical study by researchers (e.g.,
Almeida et al. 2007; Priedhorsky et al. 2007; Voss 2005). This study collects data
directly via SQL from near real-time replicas of Wikipedia databases, provided by
Wikimedia Deutschland’s Toolserver (http://toolserver.org). These databases use

MySQL and the MediaWiki database schema, which organizes articles by revision.
Brie ﬂ y, threvision table provides metadata for author contributions and links to
the pageand text table for details on the article’s contents. For every article, the
11  The Geographic Nature of Wikipedia Authorship                                    183







































 Fig. 11.VGI production process in Wikipedia. Authors contribute to place-based articles using
Wikitext and embedded geotags that are stored in database tables, including a full history of revisions.

For anonymous authors, each revision includes their IP address. In the example, two authors contribute
to an article about UC Santa Barbara whose signature dieaancd1,246 km, deﬁned as the average
distance weighted by contributions, for example,(2·40·125)/(2 5)   1246




page table contains a unique identiﬁer and the language-speciﬁc title for the article,
and the texttable stores the article’s contents. Wikipedians write articles using

Wikitex,t a loosely structured markup language (          http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Wikipedia:MARKUP), and they embed semistructured metadata within the article
(Fig. 11.3). The nondeterministic nature of Wikitext’s grammar and conventions

causes problems for structured data extraction (cf. Sauer et al.2007 ) . ThW   eP:GEO
project in Wikipedia governs an infrastructure for adding geographic information
to articles ( http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:GEO). They provide an array

of “wiki templates” that have a semistructured syntax for embedding geographic
coordinates.
184                                                                           D. Hardy


   Wikipedia-World’s database (Kühn and Alder 2008) from 10 May 2008 uses an
extensive data-mining process to extract geotags embedded in Wikitext articles
            4
(Fig. 11.1 ). For each geotagged article, we extract all the authoring history and the
most recent version from the replica databases.
   To simplify computation across language-speciﬁc databases, we migrate the
authoring histories into a single shared database, where we modify MediaWiki

tables to associate a source language for each record (e.g.,page_id and a newpage_
lang column comprise the primary key instead of onlypage_id) and to remove data
incidental to analysis. This data model provides a multilingual abstraction layer to
Wikipedia articles, authors, and their contributions. It has tables for article ,author ,

and geotagdata, and author_articleand geotag_articleassociation tuples. It also
provides fast access to summary statistics per article and per author. The data extrac-
tion from the MediaWiki tables results inpage andtext with 990,315 articles,revision
with 32,141,334 author contributions between 2001 and 2008, and     user with 578,448

registered author accounts. Since the user table contains records only for registered
authors, the analysis extracts and parses data from the       revision.rev_user_text
column to identify IP addresses for anonymous users and to integrate them into the
data model.




   11.4.2       Spatial Model of Authorship


Each author in Wikipedia has a “spatial footprint” comprised of all of the articles to
which they have contributed. For anonymous authors, we can estimate their location
using IP geolocation (Fig. 11.4). For registered authors and bots (Figs.     11.5 and

11.6), we have no direct estimate of their location, although an indirect estimate
based on their spatial footprint is possible (Lieberman and Lin 2009 ) . But are there
spatial patterns in these interactions between the authors and the places about which
they write?



  11.4.2.1     Gravity Models


In regional geography and related disciplines, spatial interaction models form the basis
of social theories (Haynes and Fotheringham 1984). These models pertain toﬂows
(interactions) between two or more geographic regions. They have a decades-long
history in geography dating back to “social physics” in the early twentieth century

(Fotheringham1981; Wilson1969,1971). Distance decay or “gravity” models are one


 4
 Their software targets a predetermined set of 21 languages: Catalan (ca), Chinese (zh), Czech
(cs), Danish (da), Dutch (nl), English (en), Esperanto (eo), Finnish (ﬁ), French (fr), German (de),
Icelandic (is), Italian (it), Japanese (ja), Norwegian (no), Polish (pl), Portuguese (pt), Russian (ru),
Slovak (sk), Spanish (es), Swedish (sv), and Turkish (tr).
11   The Geographic Nature of Wikipedia Authorship                                        185












                                                                                          represents an estimate of




                                                                                         yellow icon































                                                                                          author with 172 contributions to 143 articles in the Danish Wikipedia. The




                                                                                         anonymous










                                                                                           Spatial footprint of an


                                                                                          Fithe author’s location, based in IP geolocation
186                                                                                  D. Hardy















                                                                              represent geotagged location of



                                                                             Markers






























                                                                              author with 1,099 contributions to 296 articles in the Danish Wikipedia.




                                                                             registered









                                                                               Spatial footprint of a


                                                                              Fig. 11.5ticle edited by author, the vast majority of which are clustered inside Denmark
11   The Geographic Nature of Wikipedia Authorship                                         187






















 Fig. 11.6Spatial footprint of a botwith 3,006 contributions to 1,601 articles in the Danish

Wikipedia




type of spatial interaction model. They use “mass” functions to deal with scale and

distance effects. The general gravity model (Sen and Smit1        h995, p. 3) is

                                     Tij=   iii j   ,(ij                                 (11.1)


where T isijhe interaction between population centers               iand j ; A aid B     j  are
unspeciﬁed origin and destination weight (mass) functions; d is the spijial factor,
or distance between regions iand j; and F (d ) is an unspeciﬁed distance decay
                                                     ij
function, which is commonly a power, exponential, or gamma (combined) function
(Sen and Smith 1995, pp. 93–99).
   In spatial information theory, an individual’s         information ﬁ eld   is the spatial

distribution of the “knowledge an individual has of the world” (Morrill and Pitts
1967, p. 406) and is a factor when modeling sociospatial behaviors, like diffusion
of innovation or migration (Hägerstrand 1967 ) . An individual’s information ﬁ eld

decays as the distance from the individual increases. In quantitative geography,
gravity models formalize spatial interaction analysis by using this type of distance
decay function (Fotheringham and O’Kelly             1989; Sen and Smith 1995 ) . When

Wikipedians choose to write about a place, their mean information ﬁelds should
exhibit distance decay effects found in other sociospatial phenomena, like innova-
tion diffusion. When Wikipedians as a group write more articles, for example,

they expand the overall spatial coverage of Wikipedia articles. But when an indi-
vidual Wikipedian writes an article about a place, that place is likely to be nearby.

Thus, our hypotheses for this study are (a) Wikipedians write articles about nearby
places more often than distant ones and (b) this likelihood follows an exponential
distance decay function.
188                                                                                 D. Hardy
































 Fig. 11.7The UCSB article in English has a signature distance of 533 km based on 135 anony-
mous authors with 719 revisions. Each contribution is shown as a white line, with thicker lines

denoting more contributions


   11.4.2.2     Gravity Model for VGI Production


To model VGI production as a spatial process, we deﬁne a probabilistic model where
the dependent variable is a likelihood for interaction, based on a spatial factor.

Speciﬁcally, we use aprobabilistic invariant exponential gravity mode(lSen and Smith
1995, p. 102). In terms of Eq.11.1,T is cijverted to the probability of an interaction
based on a spatial factor. The mass termA    s andB are combined into a single invariant
                                              i      j
constant Kto allow for uneven distributions of authors and articles over the Earth’s
surface. Finally,F (d )= exp(−b d ), an exponential distance decay function.
                      ij           ij

                   Pr(d ==  da) -a·exp( bd e), =±    where    d    d ¢   .             (11.2)


    Equation11.2shows the model using the probability Pr(d = d) as the likelihood
                                                                        a
that a given article has a signature distanced eqaal to a distance dwithin a range of
d¢ ±e K ( and bare empirically derived constants). For this spatial model, we use a

“signature distance”d matric to measure the proximity effect for a given article (Hardy
et al. 2012). The metric is the average distance between an article and its n authors,
weighted by relative number of contributions from each author (Figs1         .1.3and 11.7).

That is, each anonymous author has a spatial footprint that is the set of contributions
11   The Geographic Nature of Wikipedia Authorship                                   189


made to any geotagged article by that author. Every author has a single footprint, and
every articlebelongs to its authors’ footprints. This model requires a known location
for both articles and authors, so we use MaxMind’s GeoLite City database, which

uses proprietary methods to convert IP addresses into geographic coordinates, to estimate
thelocations of anonymous Wikipedians whose IP addresses are embedded into their
contributions. Location-based services have driven the development of methods to

convert IP addresses into geographic coordinates (Muir and Oorschot2009; Stanger
2008) and to evaluate positional accuracy (Gueye et a2l.006;2007 ) .



   11.4.2.3     Model Results by Article


Toﬁt the model in Eq.      11.2to the study data, we use an ordinary least squares
regression method with a logarithmic transformation to a linear model:


                             ln [ ]dd  = =α-) α lnd    b   .                       (11.3)

   All geographic calculations use ~10-km resolution and great circle distances
(where 1=1.852 km). We selected the sample from available data to satisfy the

methodological requirements that articles have at least one anonymous contribution
(for author location estimates) and that articles have one and only one geotag (for
signature distance metric). We convert the units of d from km to 10 km, and use
                                                         a
observed relative frequency for      Pr(d = d)a The modelﬁts at         K = 0.0022 and
b =0.2842 n(= 438,077;R = 0.9005;p < 0.01;f = 17,480;DF =1,930). When sig-
nature distances are relatively low ( d <2), there is no correlation across language
                                        a
databases, suggesting spatial behavior is idiosyncratic across languages.



   11.4.2.4     Model Results by Article Category


To test whether signature distances vary by category, we collected categorical data
for English articles. Contributors may categorize Wikipedia articles into one or
more categories. These categories are not strictly tags but rather registered categories,

although anyone may create a new category. These categories are often descriptive
of a topic such as “14th-century architecture” or “Art museums and galleries in
Paris.” They may be editorial, however, and denote workﬂow items such as “Tokyo

railway station stubs,” or “All articles needing style editing,” or “Articles lacking
sources from December 2009.” The category space is ﬂat with no consistent nomen-
clature. Each article’s category is displayed at the bottom of the article, and each

category has an “article” that lists all articles belonging to that category. From our



 5Wikipedia provides access to IP addresses for anonymous, but not registered, Wikipedians.
Reportedly, Wikipedia logs IP addresses for all contributions—from anonymous and registered
Wikipedians alike—but they restrict access to those data to authorized administrators.
190                                                                             D. Hardy


  Table 11.2Popular topic keywords in English articles, sorted by distance
 1,000 km         2,000 km              3,000 km          4,000 km        5,000 km     6,000 km

 Carolina        Area                  Airports          Areas          Paris        Islands
 Channel         California            Architecture      Articles

 County          Census-designated     Building          Australia
 Illinois        Communities           Buildings         Communes
 Indiana         England               Cities            Containing

 Metropolitan    Established           Cleanup           Districts
 Michigan        Establishments        District          Former
 Micropolitan    London                Lacking           Geography

 Missouri        Museums               Municipalities    Language
 Ohio            New                   National          Mountains
 Pennsylvania    North                 Needing           Prefecture
 Television      Opened                Places            Province

 Texas           Railway               Populated         Region
 TV              States                References        Sites
 Washington      Stations              State             South

 York            United                Structure         Statements
                Venues                Structures        Stubs
                Villages              Towns             Text

                                     West              Wikipedia




study, we collected 8,474 unique categories with at least ten English articles,
comprising 372,793 articles. We then extracted 4,512 unique keywords (minus
common words) from the category title to create an inverted index of category

keywords. Each index entry has a unique category keyword, the number of articles
that belong to the category, and a mean signature distance for those articles.

   For topic keywords with at least 50 articles, Table 11.2shows the popular topic
keywords in English articles by the mean signature distance             da  n( = 372,793;

mean=3,049 km). While not conclusive, there is some evidence that signature
distances do vary by topic. Topic keywords with lower mean distances are “local” in
scope such as cities (“[New] York”), state names, administrative boundary terms

(“County” or “Metropolitan”), and buildings (“Museums”). Those with higher mean
distances were “regional” in scope such as non-English speaking cities (“Paris”), coun-

try names (“Australia”), and regional boundaries (“Islands”“o   Prrovince” or“Region”).



   11.5       Discussion


This section presents some further research issues on architectural, social, and

methodological factors, beginning with how both geotagging and geolocation could
better support VGI production processes.


 6
 Other languages also have categories, but this content analysis is restricted to English.
11  The Geographic Nature of Wikipedia Authorship                                 191


   11.5.1       Architectural Factors


The lack of well-structured geotags is problematic. In particular, further research on
methods for specifying geotags as ﬁ rst-class metadat—    a rather than as the most
basic common denominator of latitude, longitude coordinates—is needed. If col-
laborative online gazetteers with large-scale global coverage were to emerge, they

might serve as a basis for toponym-indexed geotags and thus relieve users from low-
level georeferencing tasks. In the meantime, collaborative methods are a possible
approach to improving geotag metadata, especially within scientiﬁc communities.
Currently, geotagging schemes are opaque and inconsistent and are done by am   utoted
bots or by users who specify geographic coordinates interactively from a general-
purpose mapping service. Neither of these schemes preserve semantic or context

information about place and instead leave only precise numerical coordinates of
ambiguous intent.
   For decades, metadata has been the ever-present, cure-all solution to heterogeneous
data integration and use. Yet high-quality, ubiquitous metadata is extremely rare in
practice, despite geospatial data infrastructures that are designed to be interoperable

and metadata-centric (de By et al.2009; van Loenen et al.2009 ) . Current VGI systems
may provide insights on how users could produce and manage better metadata for
geotags. Metadata is “data about data,” intended to facilitate data discovery, integration,
and use (or reuse). Practitioners often standardize metadata syntax and semantics, but
adherence to metadata standards is extremely rare in distributed systems, especially

large or global ones; this is hereafter referred to as the “metadata problem.” GIS usually
assumes strongly typed spatial data representations, and GIScientists have developed
disambiguation methods (e.g., toponym resolution or fuzzy boundaries) for spatial data
that do not comply with these structures. These complexities make metadata important
for geospatial integration and use. VGI systems, however, successfully integrate het-
erogeneous data sources on a global scale without solving the metadata problem

directly. VGI systems use “best effort” geotagging methods and representations to
avoid the complexity of richer GIScience approaches to georeferencing. Moreover, the
VGI notion of metadata, and its production and management, is different than in
geospatial data infrastructures.
   Scientiﬁc communities have collaborated on metadata standards and conven-

tions, such as CF (Hankin et al. 2009) and its predecessor (COARDS 1995 ) , but in
a study of earth science datasets published via the OPeNDAP protocol (Hardy et al.
2006), they do not accurately follow these conventions. In fact, only a minority of
them claims their convention (as required), and even of those, only a fraction accu-
rately adhere to their stated convention. In practice, scientiﬁc data sharing varies by

discipline. Ecologists, for example, take idiosyncratic approaches to data sharing
and reuse, which depend on disciplinary knowledge and social factors (Zimmerman
2007). This metadata problem forces scientists to use specialized knowledge and
manual effort for data reuse.
   Wikipedia may provide some lessons for metadata production and management

in geospatial data infrastructures (Table 11.3). GIScientists may consider the wiki
approach to metadata production and use to address how they might integrate the
192                                                                                     D. Hardy


  Table 11.3Applying Wikipedia approaches to geotagging

Approach                                Bene ﬁ t
Use trivial geotagging                  They avoid the complexity (and implications) of

                                           GIScience approaches to georeferencing. Typically,
                                           they use decimal degree geographic coordinates in an
                                           assumed datum (WGS84) and without enforcing
                                           numerical precision. For example, in Wikipedia, the
                                           geotag for UCSB is (−119.84813°, 34.41254°), where
                                                                    a
                                           0.00001°»1 m precision    . Flickr uses a similar
                                           approach but saves context for how users select
                                           location (e.g., a zoom level on an interactive map)
                                           (Jankowski et al. 2010 )

Seemingly trivial metadata structures   Wikipedia uses Wikitext (Sauer et al. 2007 ) , a lightweight
                                           markup language, for its article content and metadata.
                                           Flickr uses perhaps the simplest metadata structure of
                                           all: tags which are simply any word or phrase in an

                                           uncontrolled vocabulary
Use bots extensively                    Wikipedia has hundreds of semiautomated programs to
                                           perform a wide variety of editorial functions from
                                           removing vandalism to extracting metadata to

                                           suggesting work
 Promote “re ﬁ ned” and ﬂ ag problemT   atieccommunity identiﬁes content that is exemplary or
    content                                meets certain quality standards, and promotes this
                                           content. They ﬂag any content that needs further work

                                           which is then suggested to those looking for content
                                           to work on. They also ﬂag content that is subject to
                                           controversy or “edit wars” (Viégas et al.2007a )
Lazy, but rapid integration             Mashups and other rapid prototyping use service-level,

    (most popular ﬁrst).                   rather than data-level, integration. They focus on
                                           APIs and “cookbooks” or working examples rather
                                           than formalized speciﬁcations. This approach enables
                                           rapid integration but also lazy integration since they
                                           target speciﬁc uses with partial APIs

Complete histories of revisions         The complete context for changes is always available
                                           (and easily accessible) when issues arise or for tools
                                           to utilize
Data mining                             They have tools that search through content looking for

                                           ways to improve their service, and they provide APIs
                                           for anyone who wishes to mine content
                                           programmatically
a
 Typical GPS units report coordinates at »1 m resolution in WGS84 datum




increasingly voluminous VGI data into metadata-based geospatial data infrastrtu             uces.
In particular, the novelty and practicalities of VGI production may beneﬁt the

scientiﬁc community as they confront increasingly large-scale, heterogeneous data
integration problems in metadata-poor environments—a recurrent research area
(Hardy 2010; Hardy et al. 2006; Lanter 1991; Rodriguez et al. 2009 ) .

    Ideally for analysis, all contributions would have explicit geographic informa-
tion for the author’s location. But these data are not available in most VGI
11  The Geographic Nature of Wikipedia Authorship                                193


applications, including Wikipedia. Thus, geolocation methods are problematic
for VGI contributions due to constraints in data availability and also privacy
concerns. This study exploits IP addresses to apply geolocation methods for
anonymous contributors. IP geolocation methods, however, are inherently both

spatially and temporally dynamic in nature, inaccurate at large scales (i.e., street-
level), and relatively easily evaded by savvy users or anonymizing software
(Duckham and Kulik     2005; Muir and Oorschot 2009 ) .
   Alternatives are similarly constrained. Current survey-based methodologies are
limited (e.g., Nov (2007) used email solicitations which yielded about 150 authors)

due to the level of anonymity in Wikipedia. Spatial analysis methods based on
behavioral patterns, such as the locations of the articles to which an author has
contributed, are relatively new in this research area (Lieberman and Lin      2009 ) .
Combined approaches (i.e., where quantitative spatial analysis models are calibrated
with surveyed locations) may prove useful. Furthermore, VGI is increasingly
moving into the mobile domain where users leave (often implicitly) digital traces

more conducive to geolocation methods, such as GPS-enabled smart phones, cell
phone tower records, or even georeferenced photos (Girardin et al. 2008 ; González
et al. 2008). These trace data can enable spatial data-mining methods for tracking
trajectories of individuals or groups (Kisilevich et al. 2010 ) .
   Interdisciplinary approaches may also prove useful since geolocation methods

are used in other domains. Geographic proﬁling, for example, is a criminal “investigative
methodology that uses the locations of a connected series of crimes to determine the
most probable area of offender residence” (Rossmo2000, p. 1). Geographic proﬁling
systems use spatial distribution and probability distance strategies, such as center of
the circle, centroid, median, geometric mean, harmonim c ean, and centerof minimum

distance algorithms (Snook et al. 2005 ) .



   11.5.2       Social Factors


How do social factors (suchas communication, culture, language,settlement patterns
(diaspora), and socioeconomic status) inﬂuence VGI contributions? The production
and use of VGI will likely shift spatial data infrastructures architecturally to provide
for social factors (Budhathoki et al.  2008; Coleman et al.    2009; Elwood 2010 ;
Elwood et al. 2012; Sieber and Rahemtulla 2010). Further modeling of social char-

acteristics in the collaborative authorship process might include spatiotemporal
constraints on social networks of Wikipedians or future VGI systems based on
increasingly rich social network technologies.
   For example, the VGI production model deﬁnes work in the signature dis-
tance metric in simple terms as an edit count. But the literature has many differ-

ent deﬁnitions for “work,” including edit counts (Kittur et al.   2007 ) , edit deltas
(Zeng et al. 2006), edit similarity (i.e., information distance) (Voss   2005 ) , edit
longevity (i.e., age or survival or persistence) (Adler and de Alfaro          2007 ;
Wöhner and Peters 2009), and edit visibility (Priedhorsky et al.      2007 ) . These
194                                                                            D. Hardy


metrics may better model social processes and clarify sociospatial factors in
collaborative authorship. In particular, edit longevity and edit visibility more
                                                          7
directly reﬂect social phenomena like “edit wars”          and herding behaviors,
respectively. Similarly, our study had limited comparison of geographic effects
across article categories, but further analysis on content-centric dimensions may
help study these social processes.

   Another question is whether language and population demographics affect
spatial patterns in VGI. Ideally, spatial models for collective authorship would
include probabilities for how many potential Internet users who speak a given
language are available to make contributions for any given location. This study did

not normalize authorship by population or potential speakerdsue to a lackof available
data at the needed resolution. Balk and Yetman (  2004 ) provide relatively large-scale
data for population estimations but do not include speaker estimates. Moreover,
Internet use is spatially variant (Billón et al. 2008; Zook 2005 ) where large-scale

Internet population estimates are not readily available.
   Furthermore, at a global scale of the Internet, the concept of “near” is different
than in social science research that conducts studies at smaller scales (Graham
1998). For example, in our study, less than 2,000 km is relatively “near” compared

to the full scope of available Wikipedia contributors. Notwithstanding global or
even virtual travel (Urry 2002), typical scales for nearness are much smaller than
2,000 km, such as walking in urban centers (Turner and Penn 2002 ) or commuting
distance via transportation networks (Weber 2003 ) .
   Finally, the notion of collective action through new media is at the core of VGI.

VGI and the related phenomena ofneogeography expand the notion of the “public”
from prior work in public participation GIS to include much larger, distributed civic
participation (Elwood 2008; Hall et al. 2010; Sieber 2006; Sui 2008 ) .




   11.5.3       Methodological Factors


Finally, what methodological advancements are required for future research? The

high-volume, highly distributed, real-time, and social nature of VGI is inherently
difﬁcult to analyze with simple computational methods. Rather, as shown in our
research, signiﬁcant computational resources and data-mining methods are better
suited for empirical studies of VGI. Data-mining methods with a resolution at sub-

article levels, such as sections or paragraphs, would improve the sample size. Also,
geographic and network visualization methods may enable a visual analytics
approach to studying VGI.



 To address these actions, Wikipedia has a policy that states “Wikipedians should interact in a
respectful and civil manner” (p://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Five_pillars).
11  The Geographic Nature of Wikipedia Authorship
                                                                                    195

   In the coming years, wiki-based VGI systems, where the provenance of

information is transparent, may no longer apply as the ephemeral and social nature
of VGI rises. Speciﬁcally, one of the key challenges in methodology will be to
effectively cope with data deluge in an environment where data are ﬁltered through
social networks (Watts et al. 2002). If information primitives become based on

distance or connectivity throughﬂuctuating social networks, then traditional
information science methodologies will not be applicable at large scales. Social
network methodologies, which are based on graph theory, are now being used to
study online collaborative environments, such as massively multiplayer gaming

(Szell and Thurner 2010), and blogging (Liben-Nowell et al. 2005 ) .




   11.6       Conclusion


Although the underlying technologies of online geographic services have been in
development for many years, the behavioral impacts of VGI production are largely
unknown. These services require large-scale data interoperability and collaboration,
for example, neither of which has a purely technical solution. VGI production will

likely create new knowledge politics, and many of the problematic emerging issues
are institutional and sociobehavioral in nature, not technological (Elwood       2008,
2010; Goodchild2008). For example, the capacity of a ubiquitous Internet to reduce

communication costs has raised questions of whether geographic distance matters
in information and economic production (Cairncross 1997; Castells 2010 ) .
   This chapter addresses two basic questions in VGI production, namely, (1) how
individuals contribute place-based information to a digital commons and (2)

authorship dynamics of such collective effort. Our approach takes a user-centric
perspective of spatial behavior in VGI production. Research on VGI production is
a nascent area with many unexplored avenues, in architectural, social, and
methodological factors. These factors form a basis of a research agenda that asks

(a) how to improve the structure and quality of essential geographic metadata,
(b) how language and demographics affect VGI, and (c) how social networks
change the nature of VGI.

 AcknowledgmentsThis research was supported in part by the National Science Foundation
(awards #BCS-0849625 “Collaborative Research: A GIScience Approach for Assessing the

Quality, Potential Applications, and Impact of Volunteered Geographic Information” and #IIS-
0431166 “Collaborative Research: Integrating Digital Libraries and Earth Science Data Systems”)
and the US Army Research Ofﬁce (award #W911NF0910302). Thanks to Wikimedia Deutschland,
e.V. in Berlin, Germany, for providing the helpful Toolserver service (oolserver.org). They
provided database access, Web hosting, and computational resources for this research. Thanks to
Tim Alder and Stefan Kühn for comments on geotagging methods in Wikipedia and for sharing
their data-mining software and results. Thanks also to reviewer comments and for the many discus-
sions with students and faculty at UCSB’s Center for Information Technology and Society and
Center for Spatial Studies.
  196                                                                                    D. Hardy



    References


 Adler, B. T., & de Alfaro, L. (2007). A content-driven reputation system for the Wikipedia.
      WWW’07 . doi:  10.1145/1242572.1242608.
Alexa Internet, Inc. (2009). Alexa trafﬁc rank.       http://www.alexa.com/siteinfo/wikipedia.org.

      Accessed Dec 2009.
  Almeida, R., Mozafari, B., & Cho, J. (2007, March 26–28). On the evolution of Wikipedia. Paper
      presented at the 1st international conference on weblogs and social media, Boulder, CO.
 Amitay, E., Har’El, N., Sivan, R., & Soffer, A. (2004). Web-a-where: Geotagging web content.
      SIGIR’04 . doi:10.1145/1008992.1009040.

 Balk, D., & Yetman, G. (2004). Gridded population of the world (GPWv3).         http://sedac.ciesin.
      columbia.edu/gpw/  . Accessed Feb 2010.
 Beenen, G., Ling, K., Wang, X., Chang, K., Frankowski, D., Resnick, P. et al. (2004). Using social
      psychology tomotivate contributions to online communitCieS. W’04. doi:.1145/1031607.103164   .2

  Benkler, Y. (2002). Coase’s penguin, or, Linux and the nature of the ﬁrm. The Yale Law Journal,
      112 (3), 369–446.
 Billón, M., Ezcurra, R., & Lera-López, F. (2008). The spatial distribution of the internet in the
      European Union: Does geographical proximity matter?      European Planning Studies, 16 (1),

      119–142.
 Brabham, D. C. (2008). Crowdsourcing as a model for problem solving: An introduction and
      cases. Convergence: The International Journal of Research into New Media Technologies,
      14 (1), 75–90.

  Broder, A., Kumar, R., Maghoul, F., Raghavan, P., Rajagopalan, S., Stata, R., et al. (2000). Graph
      structure in the web. Computer Networks, 33 (1–6), 309–320.
   Browne, M. (1997). The ﬁeld of information policy: Fundamental conceptsJ.ournal of Information
      Science, 23 (4), 261–275.
  Bryant, S. L., Forte, A., & Bruckman, A. (2005). Becoming Wikipedian: Transformation of par-

      ticipation in a collaborative online encyclopedia. GROUP’05 . doi:10.1145/1099203.1099205.
  Budhathoki, N. R., Bruce, B., & Nedovic-Budic, Z. (2008). Reconceptualizing the role of the user
      of spatial data infrastructure. GeoJournal, 72 (3), 149–160.
    Cairncross, F. (1997T)h.e death of distance: How the communications revolution will change our

      lives. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
    Castells, M. (2010T)h.e rise of the network society (2nd ed.). West Sussex: Wiley-Blackwell.
   Çelik, T. (2005). Geo microformat speciﬁcation [draft].tp://microformats.org/wiki/geo. Accessed
      Dec 2009.

  COARDS (1995). Conventions for the standardization of NetCDF ﬁles.     http://ferret.wrc.noaa.gov/
      noaa_coop/coop_cdf_pro ﬁ le.html . Accessed July 2009.
  Coleman, D. J., Georgiadou, Y., & Labonte, J. (2009). Volunteered geographic information: The
      nature and motivation of produsers.   International Journal of Spatial Data Infrastructures
      Research, 4 , 332–358.

  Cronin, B. (2001). Hyperauthorship: A postmodern perversion or evidence of a structural shift in
      scholarly communication practices? Journal of the American Society for Information Science
      and Technology, 52 (7), 558–569.
  Daviel, A., & Kaegi, F. (2007). Geographic registration of HTML documents [draft].    http://tools.

      ietf.org/pdf/draft-daviel-html-geo-tag-08.pdf Accessed Dec 2009.
  de By, R., Lemmens, R., & Morales, J. (2009). A skeleton design theory for spatial data infrastruc-
      ture. Earth Science Informatics, 2 (4), 299–313.
 Duckham, M., & Kulik, L. (2005). A formal model of obfuscation and negotiation for location

      privacy. In H. W. Gellersen et al. (Eds.),Pervasive 2005 (pp. 152–170, LNCS, Vol. 3468).
      Berlin: Springer.
  Elwood, S. (2008). Volunteered geographic information: Future research directions motivated by
      critical, participatory, and feminist GIS. GeoJournal, 72 (3), 173–183.
 Elwood, S. (2010). Geographic information science: Emerging research on the societal implica-

      tions of the geospatial web. Progress in Human Geography, 34 (3), 349–357.
  11   The Geographic Nature of Wikipedia Authorship                                            197


  Elwood, S., Goodchild, M. F.& , Sui, D. Z. (2012). Researchingvolunteered geographicinformation:

      Spatial data, geographic research, and new social practice.    Annals of the Association of
      American Geographers, 102(3), 571–590. doi:    10.1080/00045608.2011.595657.
  Forte, A., & Bruckman, A. (2008). Scaling consensus: Increasing decentralization in Wikipedia
      governance. HICSS’08 . doi: 10.1109/HICSS.2008.383.

Fotheringham, A. S. (1981). Spatial structure and distance-decay parameters.         Annals of the
      Association of American Geographers, 71 (3), 425–436.
 Fotheringham, A. S., & O’Kelly, M. E. (1989).       Spatial interaction models: Formulations and
      applications. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic.

    Friedman, T. L. (200T  5h).e world is ﬂat: A brief history of the twenty-ﬁrst century . New York:
      Farrar, Straus, and Giroux.
  Girardin, F., Calabrese, F., Fiore, F., Ratti, C., & Blat, J. (2008). Digital footprinting: Uncovering
      tourists with user-generated content. IEEE Pervasive Computing, 7 (4), 36–43.

   Golder, S. A., & Huberman, B. A. (2006). Usage patterns of collaborative tagging systemsJ.ournal
      of Information Science, 32 (2), 198–208.
 González, M. C., Hidalgo, C. A., & Barabási, A.-L. (2008). Understanding individual human
      mobility patterns. Nature, 453 , 779–782.

  Goodchild, M. F. (2000). Communicating geographic information in a digital age.     Annals of the
      Association of American Geographers, 90 (2), 344–355.
 Goodchild, M. F. (2004). Scales of cybergeography. In E. Sheppard & R. B. McMaster (Eds.),
      Scale and geographic inquiry: Nature, society, and method         (pp. 154–169). Malden:

      Blackwell.
  Goodchild, M. F. (2008). Geographic information science: The grand challenges. In J. P. Wilson &
      A. S. Fotheringham (Eds.), The handbook of geographic information science (pp. 596–608).
      Malden: Blackwell.

  Graham, S. (1998). The end of geography or the explosion of place? Conceptualizing space, place
      and information technology. Progress in Human Geography, 22 (2), 165–185.
    Grif ﬁ th, V. (2007). WikiScanner.tp://wikiscanner.virgil.gr/. Accessed February 2009.
  Gueye, B., Ziviani, A., Crovella, M., & Fdida, S. (2006). Constraint-based geolocation of internet

      hosts. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, 14 (6), 1219–1232.
  Gueye, B., Uhlig, S., & Fdida, S. (2007). Investigating the imprecision of IP block-based geoloca-
      tion. In S. Uhlig, K. Papagiannaki, & O. Bonaventure (Eds.), Passive and active network mea-
      surement (pp. 237–240, LNCS, Vol. 4427). Berlin: Springer.

    Hägerstrand, T. (1967 In).novation diffusion as a spatial process. Chicago: University of Chicago
      Press.
  Hall, G. B., Chipeniuk, R., Feick, R. D., Leahy, M. G., & Deparday, V. (2010). Community-based
      production of geographic information using open source software and Web 2.0. International

      Journal of Geographical Information Science, 24 (5), 761–781.
  Hankin, S. C., & 14 co-authors (2009). NetCDF-CF-OPeNDAP: Standards for ocean data interop-
      erability and object lessons for community data standards processes. OceanObs’09: Sustained
      ocean observations and information for society . doi:10.5270/OceanObs09.cwp.41.

 Hardy, D. (2008, October 15–19).     Discovering behavioral patterns in collective authorship of
      place-based information. Paper presented at the 9th international conference of the association
      of internet researchers, Copenhagen, Denmark.
  Hardy, D. (2010, September 14). “Title not required”: The wikiﬁcation of geospatial metadata .

      Paper presented at the GIScience workshop on the role of volunteer geographic information in
      advancing science, Zurich, Switzerland.
 Hardy, D., Janée, G., Gallagher, J., Frew, J., & Cornillon, P. (2006). Metadata in the wild: An
      empirical survey of OPeNDAP-accessible metadata and its implications for discovery.       Eos

      Trans. AGU, 87(52), Fall Meet. Suppl., Abstract IN54A-04.
  Hardy, D., Frew, J., & Goodchild, M. F. (2012). Volunteered geographic information production as
      a spatial process. International Journal of Geographical Information Science . doi:10.1080/13
      658816.2011.629618   .
 Haynes, K. E., & Fotheringham, A. S. (1984).      Gravity and spatial interaction models . Beverly

      Hills: Sage.
  198                                                                                    D. Hardy


 Hecht, B. J., & Gergle, D. (2010). On the “localness” of user-generated content.       CSCW’10 .

      doi:10.1145/1718918.1718962.
   Hecht, B., & Moxley, E. (2009). Terabytes of Tobler: Evaluating the ﬁrst law in a massive, domain-
      neutral representation of world knowledge. In K. S. Hornsby (Ed.), Spatial information theory
      (pp. 88–105, LNCS, Vol. 5756). Berlin: Springer.

    Hill, L. L. (200G6)e.oreferencing: The geographic associations of information. Cambridge, MA:
      MIT Press.
  Huberman, B. A., Pirolli, P. L., Pitkow, J. E., & Lukose, R. M. (1998). Strong regularities in World
      Wide Web surﬁng. Science, 280 , 95–97.

 Jankowski, P., Andrienko, G., Andrienko, N., & Kisilevich, S. (2010). Discovering landmark
      preferences and movement patterns from photo postings.Transactions in GIS, 14(6), 833–852.
   Kisilevich, S., Mansmann, F., Nanni, M., & Rinzivillo, S. (2010). Spatio-temporal clustering. In O.
      Maimon & L. Rokach (Eds.), Data mining and knowledge discovery handbook (2nd ed., pp.

      855–874). New York: Springer.
   Kittur, A., Suh, B., Pendleton, B. A., & Chi, E. H. (2007). He says, she says: Conﬂict and coonaidoin
      in Wikipedia. CHI’07 . doi:10.1145/1240624.1240698.
Kühn, S. (2008). Workﬂow from Wikipedia-Dump to geodata.               http://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/

      Datei:Wikipedia_Geodata_Work ﬂ ow.svg   . Accessed Oct 2008. Creative Commons license (CC
      BY-SA 3.0).
Kühn, S., & Alder, T. (2008). Wikipedia-World [in German].             http://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/
      Wikipedia:WikiProjekt_Georeferenzierung/Wikipedia-World     . Accessed Oct 2008.

  Kunze, J. (1999). Encoding Dublin core metadata in HTML.      http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2731.txt.
      Accessed Mar 2008.
Lanter, D. P. (1991). Design of a lineage-based meta-data base for GIS.          Cartography and
      Geographic Information Science, 18 (4), 255–261.

  Liben-Nowell, D., Novak, J., Kumar, R., Raghavan, P., & Tomkins, A. (2005). Geographic routing
      in social networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 102 (33), 11623–11628.
 Lieberman, M., & Lin, J. (2009, May 17–20).        You are where you edit: Locating Wikipedia
      contributors through edit histories. Paper presented at the 3rd International AAAI Conference

      on Weblogs and Social Media, San Jose, CA.
    Lih, A. (2009 T)h.e Wikipedia revolution: How a bunch of nobodies created the world’s greatest
      encyclopedia. New York: Hyperion.
   Marston, S. A., Jones, J. P., & Woodward, K. (2005). Human geography without scalTer.ansactions

      of the Institute of British Geographers, 30 (4), 416–432.
 MediaWiki (2006). The technical manual for the MediaWiki software: Database layout.         http://
      www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Manual:Database_layout     . Accessed Mar 2008.
   Miller, N. (2005). Wikipedia and the disappearing “Author”.ETC: A Review of General Semantics,

      62 (1), 37–41.
  Morrill, R. L., & Pitts, F. R. (1967). Marriage, migration, and the mean information ﬁeld: A study
      in uniqueness and generality. Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 57      (2),
      401–422.

  Muir, J. A., & Oorschot, P. C. V. (2009). Internet geolocation: Evasion and counterevasion. ACM
      Computing Surveys, 42 (1), 1–23.
  Nardi, B. A., Schiano, D. J., Gumbrecht, M., & Swartz, L. (2004). Why we blog.Communications
      of the ACM, 47 (12), 41–46.

  Nov, O. (2007). What motivates Wikipedians? Communications of the ACM, 50 (11), 60–64.
  O’Reilly, T. (2005). What is Web 2.0: Design patterns and business models for the next generation
      of software. http://oreilly.com/web2/archive/what-is-web-20.html. Accessed Mar 2008.
  Priedhorsky, R., Chen, J., Lam, S. T. K., Panciera, K., Terveen, L., & Riedl, J. (2007). Creating,

      destroying, and restoring value in Wikipedia. GROUP’07 . doi: 10.1145/1316624.1316663.
  Rodriguez, M. A., Bollen, J., & Sompel, H. V. D. (2009). Automatic metadata generation using
      associative networks. Transactions on Information Systems, 27 (2), 1–20.
    Rossmo, D. K. (200G   0)e.ographic pro ﬁ lin.gBoca Raton: CRC Press.
 Sauer, C., Smith, C., & Benz, T. (2007). WikiCreole: A common wiki markup.          International

      Symposium on Wikis . doi: 10.1145/1296951.1296966.
      11   The Geographic Nature of Wikipedia Authorship                                            199


      Sen, A., & Smith, T. E. (1995). Gravity models of spatial interaction behavior. Berlin: Springer.

     Sieber, R. (2006). Public participation geographic information systems: A literature review and
         framework. Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 96 (3), 491–507.
     Sieber, R. E., & Rahemtulla, H. (2010).     Model of public participation on the geoweb.      Paper
         presented at the 6th international conference on GIScience, Zurich, Switzerland, September

         14–17, 2010.
      Snook, B., Zito, M., Bennell, C., & Taylor, P. J. (2005). On the complexity and accuracy ofraohic
         pro ﬁ ling strategiesJ.ournal of Quantitative Criminology, 21 (1), 1–26.
      Stanger, N. (2008). Scalability of techniques for online geographic visualization of web site hits.

         In A. Moore & I. Drecki (Eds.)G, eospatial vision: New dimensions in cartograph(ypp. 193–217).
         Berlin: Springer.
     Sui, D. Z. (2008). The wikiﬁcation of GIS and its consequences: Or Angelina Jolie’s new tattoo
         and the future of GIS [editorial]. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 32 (1), 1–5.

      Sundin, O., & Haider, J. (2007). Debating information control in Web 2.0: The case of Wikipedia
         vs. citizendium. Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and Technology,
         44 (1), 1–7.
      Szell, M., & Thurner, S. (2010). Measuring social dynamics in a massive multiplayer online game.

         Social Networks, 32 (4), 313–329.
      Tapscott, D., & Williams, A. D. (2006).Wikinomics: How mass collaboration changes everything.
         New York: Portfolio.
      Turner, A., & Penn, A. (2002). Encoding natural movement as an agent-based system: An investi-

         gation into human pedestrian behaviour in the built environment.Environment and Planning B,
         29 (4), 473–490.
      Urry, J. (2002). Mobility and proximity. Sociology, 36 (2), 255–274.
       van Loenen, B., Besemer, J. W. J., & Zevenbergen, J. A. (Eds.). (2009S. I convergence: Research,

         emerging trends, and critical assessment. Delft: Netherlands Geodetic Commission.
        Viégas, F. B. (2005 R)e.vealing individual and collective pasts: Visualizations of online social
         archives. Ph.D. dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA.
     Viégas, F. B., Wattenberg, M., & Dave, K. (2004). Studying cooperation and conﬂict between

         authors with history ﬂow visualizations. CHI’04 . doi:10.1145/985692.985765.
      Viégas, F. B., Wattenberg, M., Kriss, J., & van Ham, F. (2007a). Talk before you type: Coordination
         in Wikipedia. HICSS’07 . doi: 10.1109/HICSS.2007.511.
      Viégas, F. B., Wattenberg, M., & McKeon, M. M. (2007b). The hidden order of Wikipedia. In D.

         Schuler (Ed.), Online communities and social computing (pp. 445–454, LNCS, Vol. 4564).
         Berlin: Springer.
        Voss, J. (2005M).easuring Wikipedia. Paper presented at the 10th international conference of the
         International Society for Scientometrics and Informetrics, Stockholm, Sweden, July 24–28,

         2005.
     Watts, D. J., Dodds, P. S., & Newman, M. E. J. (2002). Identity and search in social networks.
         Science, 296 , 1302–1305.
      Weber, J. (2003). Individual accessibility and distance from major employment centers: An exami-

         nation using space-time measures. Journal of Geographical Systems, 5 (1), 51–70.
   Wikimedia Foundation (2010). List of Wikipedias.             http://meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/List_of_
         Wikipedias  . Accessed Sept 2010.
Wikipedia (2008). WikiProject geographical coordinates.                    http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/

         Wikipedia:GEO    . Accessed Mar 2008.
      Wilson, A. (1969). Notes on some concepts in social physics. Papers in Regional Science, 22 (1),
         159–193.
   Wilson, A. (1971). A family of spatial interaction models, and associated developments.

         Environment and Planning, 3 (1), 1–32.
      Wöhner, T., & Peters, R. (2009). Assessing the quality of Wikipedia articles with lifecycle based
         metrics. 5th international symposium on wikis and open collaboration. doi:   10.1145/1641309.
         1641333   .
 200                                                                                     D. Hardy


Zachte, E. (2009). Wikimedia visitor log analysis report: Google requests as daily averages,

     based on sample period [November 2009].     http://stats.wikimedia.org/wikimedia/squids/Squid
     ReportGoogle.htm  . Accessed Feb 2010.
 Zachte, E. (2010a). Wikimedia report card [January 2010].   http://stats.wikimedia.org/reportcard/.
     Accessed Feb 2010.

 Zachte, E. (2010b). Wikipedia statistics: Overview of recent months.    http://stats.wikimedia.org/
     EN/Sitemap.htm  . Accessed Feb 2010.
 Zeng, H., Alhossaini, M. A., Ding, L., Fikes, R., & McGuinness, D. L. (2006). Computing
     trust from revision history.   International Conference on Privacy, Security and Trust.      .

     doi:10.1145/1501434.1501445.
 Zimmerman, A. (2007). Not by metadata alone: The use of diverse forms of knowledge to locate
     data for reuse. International Journal on Digital Libraries, 7 (1), 5–16.
Zook, M. (2005). The geographies of the internet.     Annual Review of Information Science and

     Technology, 40 (1), 53–78.
   Chapter 12

Inferring Thematic Places from Spatially

Referenced Natural Language Descriptions


    Benjamin Adams          and   Grant McKenzie









 AbstractPlaces are more than just a location and spatial footprint. A sense of
place is the result of subjective experience that a person has from being in a place or
from interacting with information about a place. Although it is difﬁcult to directly
model a person’s conceptualization of sense of place in a computational representa-

tion, there exist many natural language data online that describe people’s experi-
ences with places and which can be used to learn computational representations. In
this paper we evaluate the usage of topic modeling on a set of travel blog entries to
identify the themes that are most closely associated with places around the world.
Using these representations we can calculate the similarity of places. In addition, by

focusing on individual or sets of topics we identify new regions where topics are
most salient. Finally we discuss how temporal changes in sense of place can be
evaluated using these methods.




   12.1      Introduction

J. Nicholas Entrikin( 1991)has written that narrative accountings of places are

essential resources for understanding the world becausethey provide“a distinctform
of knowing that derives from the redescription of experience in terms of a synthesis
of heterogeneous phenomena.” A key aspect of these narratives is that they come
from an individual point of view and therefore capture qualities of subjective
experiences. Much volunteered geographic information (VGI) on the Web comes



  B. Adam*s) (
  Department of Computer Science , University of California , Santa Barbara , CA , USA
e-mail: badams@cs.ucsb.edu

  G. McKenzie
  Department of Geography, University of California , Santa Barbara , CA , USA


D. Sui et al. (eds.), Crowdsourcing Geographic Knowledge: Volunteered Geographic
Information (VGI) in Theory and Practice, DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-4587-2_12,
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
202                                                           B. Adams and G. McKenzie


in the form of unstructured, natural language descriptions of places on the Earth.
Examples of these kinds of descriptions include Wikipedia articles, travel blog
entries, and entries from microblogs such as Twitter. VGI place descriptions form

rich datasets for geographic analysis; however, the vast quantity of available infor-
mation begs for automated approaches to aid analysis. In this chapter, we describe
results of using topic modeling, a popular natural language-processing technique, to
identify the latent topics in a large corpus of travel blog entries that describe places
around the world. We examine how the topics are distributed over space and time

and how individual or combinations of topics can be drawn on a map to represent
places of thematic distinction.
   Geography has traditions in both thematic and regional analysis. Thematic geog-
raphy examines the commonalities and the differences between geographic stru      tcres
through the lens of a particular theme, e.g., economics or politics. Regional geography

focuses on a particular region of the Earth and takes into account the uniquespatial
organization of that region. Spatial heterogeneity is the notion that “geographic
phenomena do not oscillate around a mean, but drift from one locally average
condition to another” (Goodchild     2009). It is an important concept in geographic
information science since it means that statistical methods that treat the world as

ﬂat will fail to accurately model many geographic scale phenomena. In a large
corpus of natural language documents, where the documents are associated with
one or more locations, the distribution of topics will be spatially heterogeneous.
Some common thematic patterns will be found across the documents that span
different geographic regions rather uniformly and other themes will be found that

are highly spatially and temporally correlated with particular locations and times.
Consequently, in these sorts of documents, there is grist for both thematic andgiroenal
geographic analysis.
   In this chapter, we describe a method for using topic modeling on georeferenced

natural language text to construct regions of thematic saliency. Topic modeling is
an automated data-mining technique that has enjoyed popularity as an effective
way to discover the latent topics in a large corpus of documents (Blei and Lafferty
2009). Informally, a topic is a semantically coherent grouping of terms that tend to
co-occur in a document. For example, a topic might be characterized by the words:

wine, vineyard, tasting, and cheese. A corpus of travel blog entries is used as an
exemplar in this chapter, but the techniques presented can be adapted to other texts
that are ordered in this manner. The text of each blog entry is modeled as a mixture
of topics produced through a random generative process and we generalize those
results over all the entries in a location. The result is that we can develop dynamic

statistical formal models of places out of highly unstructured volunteered data.
We show that some of the resulting topics correspond to speciﬁc geographic
locations and thus are applicable for predictive analytics of the form “Where (or
when) is this text about?” whereas other topics provide a means for thematic and
comparative exploration.

   One result of applying topic modeling to a large corpus is that it effectively
reduces the dimensionality of the topic space allowing researchers to identify and
compare geographic contexts based on a ﬁxed number of themes. This reduction of
12  Inferring Thematic Places from Spatially Referenced Natural Language…        203


the corpus to an interpretable number of thematic dimensions creates potential for
different sorts of analysis. For example, as we show later in the chapter, the topics
discovered in the travelogues can be used to discern whether places are generally
viewed as natural places or rather dominated by descriptions of human made fte  uares.

In addition, by looking at the most prominent topics for a given place, researchers
can identify the landmarks, features, and associated activities that are most salient
in a place from the tourist’s perspective, which can be compared and contrasted with
other data about the feature distributions at a place or descriptions written by locals.
They can also be used to ﬁnd places that otherwise might be very dissimilar but are

analogous with respect to speciﬁc thematic dimensions. Finally, when looking at a
corpus of travelogues that spans over time, researchers can use this methodology to
better understand how the touristic image of a place has changed over time.
   The fundamental premise behind our approach for creating thematic regions
is that a natural language document that describes a place is an observation of
phenomena at a particular location, x, and the mixtures of topics that compose

these kinds of observations will be spatially autocorrelated. This can be viewed as
a rewording of Tobler’sﬁrst law that near places are more similar than far apart
places (Tobler  1970). Note, that while the   mixtures of topics will show spatial
autocorrelation, the individual topics that make upthose mixtures will havediffering
degrees of global spatial autocorrelation. In other words, some topics are more

local than others.
   The remainder of this chapter is organized as follows. In Sect. 12.2, we present
background information on topic modeling, place, and related work on using topic
modeling to ﬁnd regional topics. In Sect. 12.3, we present the data collection and
preprocessing process. Section12.4 shows the results of running latent Dirichlet allo-

cation (LDA) on the data and details the method to describe and analyze places
from these results. In Sect.12.5, we show howthe topics generated canbe visualized
and how the regional extent of topics can be mapped, and in Sect.     12.6, we look
at temporal analysis of the themes. Finally, we conclude with future research.



   12.2      Background


In this section, we provide background information on place, topic modeling, and
related work.




   12.2.1       Place


According to Tuan, place is space infused with meaning, i.e., a way of making sense
of the world (Tuan 1977). Another commonly cited deﬁnition of place by Agnew
is that it is the combination of location, locale, and sense of place (Agnew 1987 ) .
By this deﬁnition, sense of place is subjective and is a product not only of the pyasli
204                                                         B. Adams and G. McKenzie


structure of a place but also the phenomenological experiences that an individual
has when in a place or when observing a reference to a place (e.g., reading about it)
(Cresswell 2004). The conceit of the methods presented in this chapter is that
what people choose to write about a place reﬂects their sense of that place, and by

generalizing over many people’s writings, we can extrapolate an aggregate view of
a place. By doing this kind of analysis, e remain agnostic onthe questionofwhether
to approach the study of place from a relatiely decentered and objectiveperspective
or relatively subjective perspective (Entrikin    1991 ) . Because topic modeling
operates on the level of individual documents, analysis can be performed on the

level of aggregations of descriptions (as we dobelow), or it can bedone on the level
of individual descriptions reﬂecting a more individualized notion of place.
   Despite the importance of place in geography and related disciplines, there has
not been much success in formally modeling  sense of place ingeographic information
systems. The operationalization of place has, however, been identiﬁed as an imptaonrt
research agenda; notably, an issue of the journalSpatial Cognition and Computation

was dedicated to this question (Winter et al. 2009 ) . Multidimensional measures of
sense of place have been explored in human geography, but they tend to be tesu tsing
psychological experimental studies of very speciﬁc geographic settings, e.g., lakere
properties (Jorgensen and Stedman 2006). The goal in this chapter is to explore
unsupervised ways of operationalizing place using a much larger, crowdsourced

dataset generated by many different people.



   12.2.2       Topic Modeling


Generative topic modeling encompasses a suite of unsupervised data-mining meoth   ds
for uncovering the semantic structure of textualocuments in a largecorpus(Steyvers
and Grif ﬁ ths2007). A generative topic model is a statistical model that explains
how the words found in documents are generated as the result of a random process.

For the most popular generative topic model, LDA, each word in a document is
chosen from one of a set of topics that are shared among all the documents in the
corpus (Blei et al. 2003). Each document is modeled as a unique mixture of topics
(i.e., a multinomial distribution over topics), and each topic in turn is a multinomial
distribution over words. Therefore, to generate each word, one can imagine two
weighted dice being tossed. The ﬁrst die has as many sides as there are topics and is

weighted uniquely for each document. It is used to probabilistically sample a topic.
Then, given the selected topic, we toss another dice speciﬁcally weighted for that
topic and with as many sides as there are words in the corpus, drawing the word.
This generative process is easily extended and can take into account other informa-
tion, such as authorship, which has lead to a number of variants of LDA (Steyvers

et al. 2004). Topic models are bag-of-words models, which means that the order
and syntactic context of the words in the text do not factor in the result.
   The goal of topic modeling is to infer the latent variables (i.e., the weights on
the dice) most likely to have generated the observed words in a corpus of existing
documents. This inference is a Bayesian-inferencing problem on a large probabilistic
12  Inferring Thematic Places from Spatially Referenced Natural Language… 205


graphical model. The main innovations in topic modeling over the last decade have
been to develop efﬁcient algorithms for approximating this inference, given that an
exact solution to the problem is computationally intractable. Algorithms that use a

Gibbs sampling Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) approach have proved effec-
tive to approximate parameters (see Grifﬁths and Steyvers; Bishop2006 ) .
   When running an LDA inference, the inputs are the a and b hyperparameters,
the number of topics, and the observed data. The ahyperparameter determines

how many topics are assigned to a given document (a very small a will essentially
assign one topic to every document). Theb hyperparameter determines whether the
words are distributed more or less evenly over the topics. A number of excellent
implementations of LDA based on MCMC are freely available. For the workspeted

in this chapter, we used the topic modeling toolkit contained within the MAchine
Learning for LanguagE Toolkit (MALLET) (McCallum 2002 ) .
   LDA is very modular, and several extensions to LDA have been developed,
including ones that allow for learning the number of topics, supervised labels,
and correlations between topics (cf. Blei and Lafferty 2006; Teh et al. 2006; Li and

McCallum 2006; Blei and Mcauliffe 2008). Extensions add to the computational
complexity of the approximate inferencing, however. In the analysis presented in
this chapter, we utilized the original LDAmodel, though the posthoc spatialanalyses
of the topic modeling results presented here are fully compatible with any of the many

topic modeling variants.


  12.2.2.1    Similarity of Documents


 The Kullback-Leibler divergence,DKL (also known as the relative entropy) of the
topic distributions of two documents can be used as a similarity measure. LetP and
Q be probability distributions of a random discrete variable:

                                                P(i)
       g     o      l    DPKL() |iP( =å         Q(i)
                                       i
   Kullback-Leibler is an asymmetric measure; i.e., the distance fromP to Q is dif-

ferent than the distance from Qto P. If a symmetric measure is desired, then the
Jensen-Shannon divergence, D JScan be used instead:

                               1 1
                  DPJS() |D| M| + KL()           KL()
                               2 2
            1
where  MQP= 2()       .



   12.2.3     Related Work


A location topic model for travelogues has been developed that explicitly decom-
poses documents into local and global topics (Hao et al.2010). There has been some
206                                                          B. Adams and G. McKenzie


work on extending the LDA model to include information on document labels or
links, which can be used to train for topics that are predictive of a variable (e.g., a
location label) (Wang et al. 2007; Blei and Mcauliffe 2008; Chang and Blei 2009 ) .

In addition, models have been developed to speciﬁcally train for spatiotemporal
themes (Mei et al.2006 ) . However, b   syeci ﬁ cally training ftoorpics thatare predic-
tive of location or time, we lose the ability to examine how the spatial and temporal
distribution of individual topics differ from one another. One goal of the work

presented here is to be able to characterize the degree to which different locations
share or do not share themes. By focusing on post hoc analyses of topic modeling
results, we create techniques that are applicable to a wide variety of source data and
are not be overspeciﬁed for a speciﬁc domain. However, all the above approaches

are compatible with the work presented here. In addition, although the methodology
presented here focuses on text analysis, it can be augmented by incorporating other
kinds of data such as images (Serdyukov et al. 2009 ) .



   12.3       Data Preprocessing


There are a number of blogging sites on the Web that allow people to post blog
entries about their travel experiences. Since we were interested in exploring a
diverse set of entries from around the world that were written by a variety of authors,
we looked at some of the larger sites, including travelpod.com, travelblog.org, and
                                                         1
travellerspoint.com as sources of data. Travelblog.org was chosen given its rela-
tively simple user interface, and a Web crawler was written to download the text for
all the public entries through September 2010. In addition to the text, the date and
location, in the form of a geographic hierarchy of the entry, were also saved.

Travelblog.org entries often have images and video as well, but since we were only
interested in textual analysis, we did not download those; however, such informa-
tion could be used in the future for a more complex semantic analysis of the entries.
In total, 309,683 blog entries were downloaded.
   The entries were preprocessed for LDA using the following steps. First, some

blog entries consist almost entirely of pictures or video, so entries with fewer than
100 words were removed. Second, during our exploratory analysis, we discovered
that the words from blogs written in languages other than English tend to be orga-
nized by LDA into their own topics. To mitigate this problem, a language detection

script was run on each entry, and those entries labeled as non-English were removed.
However, due to the presence of some entries that were written in English as well as
in another language, some of this effect was still found. Third, the words in the
entries were ﬁltered against a standard list of English stop words, and all punctua-
tion and HTML markups were removed. After preprocessing, the input dataset con-

sisted of 275,468 blog entry documents.
   Travelblog.org lets users specify the location associated with an entry within a
geographic hierarchy (e.g., North America, United States, California, Los Angeles).

 1
 http://www.travelblog.org
12  Inferring Thematic Places from Spatially Referenced Natural Language…          207


Users usually select the location from a predeﬁned taxonomy, but they can suggest
a new location that will be added to the database dependent on moderator approval.
There does not appear to be a standard method for determining how countries

are subdivided into regions. Some countries such as the United States and France
have regions based onﬁrst-level political administrative units, but other countries
are subdivided into nonpolitical geographic regions or skip directly to local town/
city-level regions. Users have ﬂexibility to specify location at any depth of tgrapehic

hierarchy, which means that some entries are labeled in a coarse-grained manner
(e.g., California). In addition, it is difﬁcult to compare regions at the same level
because they reference areas that vary greatly in size. For example, Andorra and
Russia are both at the same level.

   We mapped the user-deﬁned locations to geometric representations to aid the
visualization and spatial analysis. One mapping was achieved by geocoding each
unique location to a latitude-longitude point using the Google Maps geocoding
Web service. The service handled all but about 500 locations, which were han    cdded.
In total, each entry was mapped to one of 10,496 locations. The coarse granularity

of some locations, while problematic, is unavoidable as entries about a person’s
travel experience will inherently be aboutfuzzy places or even multipleplacesrather
than a point on a map.
   The 10,496 locations are not uniformly distributed around the world, and in some

places (e.g., in the London area), several location points exist in close proximity
to one another. For the purpose of analysis, we created a one-quarter-degree grid
over the Earth and aggregated all locations within a single grid square. A new point
location was speciﬁed as the centroid of the grid square. Although a grid of that
size consists of over a million cells, only 7,227 actually had associated entries.

As an alternative method, the locations were also mapped to the United Nations
Global Administrative Unit Layers (GAUL), a product of the Food and Agricultural
Organization (FAO). That representation has three geographic layers mapped     cotunty,
state, and country represented in shapeﬁle format, which allowed us to aggregate

entries based on political boundaries.


   12.4       Modeling Places from LDA Results


Given a set of georeferenced documents, D, the ﬁrst step in our approach is to use

LDA on the corpus to generate a set of topids, T. Following the LDA training, for    d
each document, d, we have a location x = <     x ,y > and aT-dimensional vector, q ,
specifying the multinomial distribution of topics for that document. Because the
latitude and longitude speciﬁed for ageoreferenced article is oftenan approximation
of a vaguely deﬁned region and there may be more than one article for a particular

location, we need to relax the location. That is done by generating a ﬁxed-sized
grid over the Earth and averaging the topic distributions for each grid square,     g i
by ﬁnding the mean topic distribution vector,    θ gi, for all the documents spatially
included within the square. Given the topic distributions for a set of grid squares, the

next step is to spatially interpolate a continuous ﬁeld representation for each topic.
208                                                         B. Adams and G. McKenzie






















 Fig. 12.1 Sample latent topics from 200-topic LDA run



   12.4.1       Topic Modeling Results


During our empirical tests, we ran several Gibbs sampling simulations on the dataset
for 20, 50, 100, 200, 300, and 400 topics. For the selection ofa ,b, and topic number

parameter values, we followed suggestions presented in Grifﬁths and Steyvers
 (2004). We kept the b value constant at 0.1 and the a value at 50/# of topics.
   The topics that are discovered using LDA are often represented as an ordered list
of the most commonly generated words for that topic. While these lists do rank

the words in a topic from the most commonly generated word on down, they ignore
the relative importance of the words. For example, in one topic, the top-ranked
word might have probability 0.08 and the next most common word 0.01, which
means the ﬁrst word is eight times as commonly generated as the second. In other
topics, the ﬁrst and second word might have very close probabilities. We found that

a word cloud visualization that shows the words in relative sizes is more illustrative
and will therefore use that method in lieu of lists.
   After observing the results, we found that the topics tend to fall into four broad
categories: activity topics, feature topics, locality topics, and miscellaneous topics.
Activities and features are distributions of words related to things to do and see,

respectively. Locality topics consist of words that are associated with a speciﬁc
geographic location. Miscellaneous topics are ones that do not appear to have any
special relationship to traveling per se but nevertheless reﬂect semantic structures
in the language. Many topics fall into more than one of these categories, which
are fuzzy. Figure 12.1 shows some sample topics from a 200-topic run.
12  Inferring Thematic Places from Spatially Referenced Natural Language…         209


   12.4.2       Adding Location Information


A trained LDA model results in a topic mixture for each blog entry. The LDA model
does not include any spatial or temporal information as a parameter, so we do a

post hoc analysis of the topic strengths for entries associated with speciﬁc locations.
We propose that by combining the topic mixtures for all the entries in a location, an
aggregate picture of that location’s sense of place can be drawn. The best technique

for aggregating the topic mixtures is not immediately apparent, however. The blog
entries are not evenly distributed over the locations, and as a result, there are some
locations with many more entries than at other locations. For our examples in this

and the following section, we will identify the location of places with the one-
quarter-degree grid squares as described in the previous section. One simple method
of calculating a location topic distribution is to take the average q values for each

topic at the location. Let M be the number of entries for a location, qije the value
for the ith topic of the jth entry, andqL be the location topic distribution:

                                           M
                                           å q ij
                                     L =   j=1
                                      qi    M

   The location topic distributions can then be used to calculate the similarity

between places using the relative entropy measures described in Sect.       12.2as a
semantic distance measure. In order to get a similarity value [0.1], we deﬁne the
similarity of places as an exponentially decaying function of this distance measure:
  -DKL
e     (in this case using the asymmetric relative entropy). Alternately, one could
use a linear or Gaussian decay function (Shepard 1987 ) . Figur1   e2.2 maps out the
similarity of places to Santa Barbara, CA. The results show a clear example of

Tobler’s ﬁrst law of geography that generally speaking near places are more similar
than far places (Tobler 1970), but it also captures that Santa Barbara shares some
themes with some far places as well (such as urban areas in New York, for example).

   This method treats locations with one or two entries as equal to locations with
hundreds of entries. Depending on the goal of the analysis, this may or may not be
problematic because locations with many entries (such as London) will tend to have

a much smoother topic distribution due to the averaging. Intuitively, this makes
sense because it is characteristic of global cities such as London that they are
extremely heterogeneous and should reﬂect many different perspectives and themes.

However, it is possible to normalize the distributions using the entropy of L qs the
normalizing parameter.
   An entropy measure, L , can be used to determine the degree to which a location
                           e
topic distribution is about a few topics or many topics:
                                     n
                        L Lp L p=-            log
                              e     å    ()qiq i        )
                                    i1
210                                                         B. Adams and G. McKenzie





























 Fig. 12.2Similarity to Santa Barbara, CA, based on relative entropy measures





   The lower the entropy, the fewer the number of topics being written about for
that location. Figure12.3 shows the entropy of all places around Australia where we

haveﬁve or more entries. This map illustrates that urban areas tend to have more
diversity in topics being discussed than rural areas. Presumably, given that we are
looking at travel blog entries, this is because certain rural locations are visited by
people to undertake speciﬁc types of activities. Also, there is less heterogeneity in

terms of the human geographic features in those places.
   We propose that if an individual topic probability is prominent despite high
overall entropy of the topic distribution for a location, it should be considered

comparatively more important than an equivalent topic probability in a location
with very low entropy. Let L be the location entropy, N be the number of topics,
and g be a scalar; the strength s of topic i is de ﬁ ned as
                                i

                                    ì g L q ,   >  1
                                    ï    ei  i    N
                                si= í                .
                                    ï  qq,    ³  1
                                    î    i i     N

   The conditional is due to the fact that we only want to increase the prominence
of topics that already have a probability greater than or equal to 1/N .
12   Inferring Thematic Places from Spatially Referenced Natural Language…             211































 Fig. 12.3 Entropy of places in Australia



   12.5       Constructing Regions of Thematic Distinction


Using the s is an indicator of the salience of topic i at a speciﬁc point location, we
can use spatial statistics to generate aﬁeld representation of the topic’s relevance

around the world. Polygonal regions indicating where the topic is most relevant can
be constructed by calculating a contour from theﬁeld representation based on a
threshold value. In our examples, we identify topic strengths for the one-quarter-

degree grid square centroids as described in Sect.12.3. The topic strength at a point
is treated as a point count input into an Epanechnikov kernel density estimation
function (de Smith et al. 2007 ) .

    Figures12.4 and 12.5 show results of mapping two top2cs using this method
with contour lines at topic strength equal to 0.01.       The wine topic is shown for
Europe. The temple topic illustrates the regionality of some topics – temple fea-
tures are found much more often in South and East Asia, and this is reﬂected in

what people write about in those places. Mapping out topics in this way is a two-way
street. Not only does it provide a mechanism for exploratory analysis to ﬁnd out


 It should be emphasized that the topic regions for the exemplars in this chapter reﬂect strong
biases from the fact that original data are travel blog entries.
212                                                                              B. Adams and G. McKenzie



                                                                   Norway                          Topic Strength
                                                                                   Sweden               0.03 - 0.05
                                                                                                        0.05 - 0.08
                  U.K. of Great Britain and Northern ireland                                            0.08 - 0.11

                                                                                                        0.11 - 0.14
                                                                                                        0.11 - 0.16
                                                                                                        0.16 - 0.19
                                                                                                        0.19 - 0.22
                                                                                                        0.22 - 0.25
        Ireland                                                                                         0.25 - 0.27

                                                                                                  Poland
                                                                    Germany
                                                 Belgium
                                                                                 Czech Republic

                                                                                                     Slovakia

                                                            Switzerland             Austria      Hungary
                                         France
                                                                                         Crotia             Romania







      Portugal         Spain                                     Italy                                    Greece



                                                                                   Italy

                                                                                          0        300       600 km


 Fig. 12.4Wine topic strengths




where certain topics are being mentioned but also in some cases the visualization

can help in the interpretation of the meaning of the topic. For example, in our
400-topic simulation, two distinct topics (nos. 275 and 384) were generated that

had war as the top-ranked word (see Fig. 12.6). Topic 275 appears to refer to war

history, whereas topic 384 appears to be more about current war events. By map-

ping out the weights, we can begin to conﬁrm those assumptions. Topic 384 is
strong in current or recent hotspots (e.g., Iraq, Afghanistan, Sri Lanka), but topic

275 is not.





    12.5.1           Visualizing Multiple Topics



 Figure12.7 shows a map of topics grouped into two themes. Topics related to human
characteristics of place are shown in contrast to those related to physical characteri-

stics. Through examination of the 200 topics, approximately 12 topics could be

characterized as relating exclusively to the physical environment (e.g., mountains,

rivers, beaches). Additionally, 13 topicsare related speciﬁcally tohuman-constructed
features (e.g., churches, cities, markets). Many other topics had both physical and

human components. We aggregated the “physical” and “human” topics into twe                                  ornkel

density estimations created from the quarter-degree point values with a 1.5° radius.
12    Inferring Thematic Places from Spatially Referenced Natural Language…                                    213










                                                                                                            1,500




                                                                                                           750
                                                                                           Australia

                                                                                                           0







                                                                  Indonesia




                         MongoliaChina






          Russian Federation

                                              India







                       Kazakhstan







                                                                                     Madagascar
                                                Saudi Arabia
                                     Iraq

                                                           Ethiopia

                               Turkey
                      Ukrqaine

                                          Egypt       Sudan



                                                     Chad
                   Poland                                                      Angola

         Sweden


                                                          Nigeria

                        France
                                         Algeria   Mali     Niger

                              Spain



                                                                               0.010-.002.00-.2004.00-.4006.00-.6007.00-.7009.00-.9100.01-.0102.01-.2104.1-40.15


                                                                                                                     topic strengths
                                                                            Topic Strength


                                                                                                                   Temple






                                                                                                                    Fig. 12.5
214                                                         B. Adams and G. McKenzie

































































 Fig. 12.6 Mapping topics 275 and 384
12   Inferring Thematic Places from Spatially Referenced Natural Language…                      215





















  TopiBoth Human & Physical Characteristics
      Physical Characteristics
      Human Characteristics




 0 175350 km


 Fig. 12.7Comparing regions based on strength of human vs. physical geography topics




The polygons displayed on the map show regions with a kernel density theme

value aboveits mean. For example, the originalphysical characteristics themevalues
ranged from approximately 0.203–2.723 with a mean value of 0.457. The polygons
shown on the map only contain values above 0.457.




    12.5.2         Measuring the Localization of a Topic


As we have mentioned earlier, some of the topics generated by LDA have place

names as top words and very clearly correspond to one speciﬁc region of the Earth.
And as the maps in the previous sections show, there are some topics that show up

in more than one part of the world but nevertheless are not evenly distributed
everywhere (where everywhere in this context means all the locations for which we

have blog entries). We would like to be able to measure the degree to which a topic
is written about in one area or many or everywhere.
     The topic strengthsSss=s{,}, , º             for topic i at a set of n locations (e.g., the
                             i ii i i  n2
7,277 grid cells with entries) can be interpreted as a kind of categorical probability
distribution. The localization of topic i can then be evaluated as an inverse function

of the entropy measure on that distribution. However, before localization can be
216                                                             B. Adams and G. McKenzie


evaluated in this manner, the topic strengths must be normalized so that they sum to 1.
Let k be a location; the “probability” of k for topic i is

                                               sk
                                       p k =  n    .
                                                s
                                             åj=1ij


    Localization of topic i is then deﬁned as follows:
                                              n
                                             å pk kog
                                     L=iγe   k-1      ,

    where g is a constant scalar value.




   12.6       Temporal Analysis


In their analysis of scientiﬁc topics, Grifﬁths and Steyvers(       2004 ) showed how a
post hoc analysis of the linear trend line of the meanq value for an LDA topic could
be used to infer its “hotness” or “coldness.” A similar technique can be used to

identify the dynamic change in topics being written about in travel blog entries.
To illustrate, we present some results from a 400-topic simulation that was run for
1,000 iterations. The mean theta value for each topic per day was calculated from

all entries with at least 100 words that were written between January 1, 2006 and
August 31, 2010.
    Figures12.8 and12.9 show how aChinese locality topic is trending upward over

this time period while aJapanese locality topic is trending downward. The increase
in variance of the point values in 2010 can be explained by the fact that fewer people
were blogging on travelblog in 2010 than in previous years. While a linearﬁt is

useful for revealing the overall drift in a topic’s popularity, nonlinear ﬁts can illumi-
nate periodic patterns in a topic’s popularity. For example, many of the LDA topics
show seasonal ﬂuctuations. Afestival topic peaks during February and March when

many festivals (e.g., Carnival and Mardi Gras) happen around the world (see
Fig. 12.10). The strength of other topics coincides with speciﬁc types of events such
as natural disasters. For example, topic 387 shown in Fig.     12.11 peaks after the May

2008 Sichuan earthquake. While it would require a much more in-depth analysis to
verify, it is conceivable that some topics act as leading indicators for some types
of events, especially ones that are socially constructed.

   Combined with geographic information, this kind of analysis shows how some
topics trend differently in different locations. A closer look at topic 387 shows that it,
in fact, peaks at two different times in 2008 depending on the location of the entry. In

China, predictably, it peaks in May 2008 after the Sichuan earthquake. However, in
both the United States and India, it peaks when the Mumbai terrorist attacks occurred
in October 2008. A review of the entries written at these places and times veriﬁes that

these events were referenced using words from the topic 387 distribution.
12   Inferring Thematic Places from Spatially Referenced Natural Language…           217


                Topic 121 - chinese, china, beijing, shangahai, city, square, forbidden

             OLS b = 8.18701926800903e-07










  Mean theta






     0.000      0.005     0.010      0.015
       2006            2007            2008            2009            2010

 Fig. 12.8Chinese topic trending upward



                         Topic 7 - japanese, japan, tokyo, train, sushi, osaka

            OLS b = -9.0532775912e-07



    0.008   0.010






  Mean theta




    0.002   0.004   0.006



       2006            2007            2008            2009             2010
                                            Date

 Fig. 12.9Japanese topic trending downward






   12.7       Summary and Conclusions



Much of the VGI available on the Web comes in the form of textual descriptions.
In this chapter, we presented ways of using topic modeling to identify a place’s

unique mixture of characteristics directly from natural language observations. These
methods allow us to calculate the similarity of places, map out places of thematic
218                                                               B. Adams and G. McKenzie


                      Topic 33 - festival, people, parade, streets,street, music, fireworks


             LOESS, Span 0.1









 Mean theta








    0.020060.002   0.0042007006  0.008  0.010  0.012       2009             2010
                                          2008
                                          Date

 Fig. 12.10Festival topic peaks in February/March




                   Topic 387 - people, news, hit, earthquake, damage, happened, bomb

             LOESS, span 0.04










  Mean theta





     0.002  0.004 0.006   0.008  0.010  0.012


        2006             2007             2008             2009              2010

                                                Date

 Fig. 12.11 Topic 387 strength corresponds to speci ﬁ c events




distinction, measure the degree to which certain themes are local or global, and

evaluate thematic change over time. These results open up new opportunities for
understanding the makeup and dynamism of places as described from individual

experiences. A future task is to examine how these operationalized representations
of place can be incorporated into a more robust framework that affords more in-

depth reasoning about place, including a context-dependent similarity measure.
12   Inferring Thematic Places from Spatially Referenced Natural Language…                  219


 Fig. 12.12 Latent
Dirichlet allocation
model plate notation













The issue of granularity remains a problem in terms of locating the documents in
space, and further work needs to be done to incorporate a granularity metric into the
representations generated using our methods.


 Acknowledgments The authors wish to thank Mike Goodchild and two anonymous reviewers for
their valuable comments.



   12.8        Appendix A: Latent Dirichlet Allocation Model


This appendix describes the generative model for LDA (Blei et al. 2003 ) . Le             at be

the Dirichlet hyperparameter of the per-document topic distributions,                bbe the
Dirichlet hyperparameter for the per-topic word distributions,q be the multinomial
                                                                        i
topic distribution for document i ,z be ije topic for thejth word in document i , and
w ij the jth word. The generative model for LDA is then deﬁned as follows:

•    Choose  qiproportional to Dirichlet(a), where i ∈ {1, …, M }.
• For each of the words w , where j ∈ {1, …, N }:
                               ij
   –     Choose a topzic proportional to multinomial(q).
                          i,j                                 i
   – Choose a word w propori,jnal to multinomial(bz ) .         i,j

    Figure12.12 shows the plate notation representation of the LDA model. Plan            tota-
tion is a shorthand representation of graphical probabilistic models that have many

repeating variables. Each circle represents a variable in the model and the number
in the lower right corner indicates the number of times the variable is repeated.
For example,q is repeatedM times in the model shown. The shaded varaible w is the

only observed variable (i.e., the words in the documents).



  References


  Agnew, J. (198T 7)h.e United States in the world economy. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University
   Press.
  Bishop, C. (2006 P)a.ttern recognition and machine learning (Vol. 4). New York: Springer.
 220                                                                  B. Adams and G. McKenzie


  Blei, D. M., & Lafferty, J. D. (2006). Correlated topic models. In Y. Weiss, B. Schölkopf, & J. Platt

     (Eds.), Advances in neural information processing systems (NIPS) 18         (pp. 147–154).
     Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
 Blei, D. M., & Lafferty, J. D. (2009). Topic models. In A. N. Srivastava & M. Sahami (Eds.), Text
     mining: Classiﬁcation, clustering, and applications (pp. 71–94). Boca Raton: CRC Press.

 Blei, D., & McAuliffe, J. (2008). Supervised topic models. In J. C. Platt, D. Koller, Y. Singer, & S.
     Roweis (Eds.), Advances in neural information processing systems (NIPS) 20 (pp. 121–128).
     Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
 Blei, D. M., Ng, A. Y., & Jordan, M. I. (2003). Latent Dirichlet allocation. Journal of Machine

     Learning Research, 3 , 993–1022.
  Chang, J., & Blei, D. (2009). Relational topic models for document networks. In D. van Dyk & M.
     Welling (Eds.), Proceedings of the 12th international conference on artiﬁcial intelligence and
     statistics (AISTATS) (pp. 81–88). Clearwater Beach: Journal of Machine Learning Research.

   Cresswell, T. (2004 P)l.ace: A short introduction. Malden: Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
 de Smith, M., Goodchild, M., & Longley, P. (2007). Geospatial analysis: A comprehensive guide
     to principles, techniques and software tools (2nd ed.). Leicester: Winchelsea Press.
   Entrikin, N. (1991T)h.e betweenness of place: Toward a geography of modernity      . Baltimore:

     Johns Hopkins University Press.
  Goodchild, M. F. (2009). What problem? Spatial autocorrelation and geographic informationesnccie.
     Geographical Analysis, 41 (4), 411–417.
Grifﬁths, T. L., & Steyvers, M. (2004). Finding scientiﬁc topics.    Proceedings of the National

     Academy of Sciences, 101(Suppl. 1), 5228–5235.
  Hao, Q., Cai, R., Wang, C., Xiao, R., Yang, J. M., Pang, Y., & Zhang, L. (2010). Equip tourists with
     knowledge mined from travelogues. In M. Rappa, P. Jones, J. Freire, & S. Chakrabarti (Eds.),
     Proceedings of the 19th international conference on world wide web (WWW’10)(pp.401–410).

     New York: ACM Press.
 Jorgensen, B. S., & Stedman, R. C. (2006). A comparative analysis of predictors of sense of place
     dimensions: Attachment to, dependence on, and identiﬁcation with lakeshore properties.
     Journal of Environmental Management, 79 , 316–327.

Li, W., & McCallum, A. (2006). Pachinko allocation: DAG-structured mixture models of topic
     correlations. InICML’06: Proceedings of the 23rd international conference on machine learning
     (pp. 577–584). New York: ACM Press.
   McCallum, A. (2002M   ).ALLET: A machine learning for language toolkit.  http://mallet.cs.umass.

     edu. Accessed October 8, 2011.
 Mei, Q., Liu, C., Su, H., & Zhai, C. (2006). A probabilistic approach to spatiotemporal themetpeartn
     mining on weblogs. In L. Carr, D. D. Roure, A. Iyengar, C. A. Goble, & M. Dahlin (Eds.),
     Proceedings of the 15th international conference on world wide web(pp. 533–542). New York:

     ACM Press.
 Serdyukov, P., Murdock, V., & van Zwol, R. (2009). Placing ﬂickr photos on a map. In J. Allan,
     J. A. Aslam, M. Sanderson, C. Zhai, & J. Zobel (Eds.), Proceedings of the 32nd international
     ACM SIGIR conference on research and development in information retrieval (pp. 484–491).

     New York: ACM Press.
  Shepard, R. N. (1987). Toward a universal law of generalization for psychological sciencS.cience,
     237 (4820), 1317–1323.
 Steyvers, M., & Grifﬁths, T. (2007). Probabilistic topic models. In T. Landauer, D. Mcnamara, S.

     Dennis, & W. Kintsch (Eds.), Handbook of latent semantic analysis (pp. 424–440). Hillsdale:
     Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
 Steyvers, M., Smyth, P., Rosen-Zvi, M., & Grifﬁths, T. (2004). Probabilistic author-topic models
     for information discovery. In KDD’04: Proceedings of the tenth ACM SIGKDD international

     conference on knowledge discovery and data mining (pp. 306–315). New York: ACM Press.
Teh, Y. W., Jordan, M. I., Beal, M. J., & Blei, D. M. (2006). Hierarchical Dirichlet processes.
     Journal of the American Statistical Association, 101 , 1–30.
 12  Inferring Thematic Places from Spatially Referenced Natural Language…                  221


Tobler, W. (1970). A computer movie simulating urban growth in the Detroit region.   Economic

    Geography, 46 (2), 234–240.
   Tuan, Y. F. (197S7p. ce and place: The perspective of experience. Minneapolis: The Regents of
    the University of Minnesota.
Wang, C., Wang, J., Xie, X., & Ma, W. Y. (2007). Mining geographic knowledge using location

    aware topic model. In R. Purves & C. Jones (Eds.), Proceedings of the 4th ACM workshop on
    geographic information retrieval (pp. 65–70). New York: ACM Press.
 Winter, S., Kuhn, W., & Krüger, A. (2009). Guest editorial: Does place have a place in geographic
    information science? Spatial Cognition and Computation, 9 , 171–173.
   Chapter 13
“I Don’t Come from Anywhere”: Exploring

the Role of the Geoweb and Volunteered

Geographic Information in Rediscovering

a Sense of Place in a Dispersed Aboriginal
Community



   Jon Corbett


 Abstract This chapter explores the role of participatory mapping, the geoweb, and

volunteered geographic information in rediscovering a sense of place within a phys-
ically dispersed Aboriginal community, the Tlowitsis Nation from Northern
Vancouver Island. Centered on a community-based research project, this chapter
examines how the participatory geoweb might be used by Tlowitsis members to
better understand and reconnect with their land-related knowledge, as well as exam-
ine the ways in which these technologies serve to re-present place-based memories
and facilitate dialogue amongst community members located in different geographic
settings.




     13.1     Background

The territory of the Tlowitsis Nation spans the coastal area of Northern Vancouver
Island, British Columbia. Seasonal travel routes, food processing spots, burial and

cultural sites, and other named places extend across the entire territory. Karlukwees,
located on remote Turnour Island, has been a central settlement for the Tlowitsis
Nation since the turn of the twentieth century. In the early 1960s, the British
Columbia provincial government halted essential services to the island. With little
prospect of schooling and access to health care, the Tlowitsis community began to
leave the island. In the ensuing diaspora, community members have become cultur-
ally, as well as physically, removed from their traditional territories. Many Tlowitsis

members lack a deep sense of their identity and are most often poorly acquainted



  J. Corett) (
Department of Community, Culture and Global Studies,
University of British Columbia Okanagan , Kelowna , BC , Canada
e-mail: jon.corbett@ubc.ca

D. Sui et al. (eds.), Crowdsourcing Geographic Knowledge: Volunteered Geographic
Information (VGI) in Theory and Practice, DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-4587-2_13,
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
224                                                                           J. Corbett


with their relatives and other members of the Nation. One member expressed these
feelings, the essence of which makes up the titleof this chapter, ina groupdiscussion
during a Tlowitsis Nation meeting in 2006:

   It’s kind of hard to say where I come from because I don’t come from anywhere. To say
   that, being First Nations is important, but to say that I’m Tlowitsis doesn’t really have any
   signiﬁcance for my family … I went there as a child – but for me to pass anything on to my
   children, its really hard to explain to them where our extended family came from because
   there’s nothing, there’s no land, there’s nothing to go to.

   A rising urban population with little attachment to these lands has reduced the
opportunity and ability for members to take an active and informed role in their
community. The Nation’s governing body has had difﬁculty in maintaining

communication and participation of its membersin Tlowitsis activities. Despitethese
issues, the Tlowitsis involvement in land claims negotiations have compelled them
to engage their members in treaty-related decision-making. There remains a core
group of elders in the community with knowledge of the lands, resource use, and

language, as well as a number of community leaders and youth with a desire to
participate in planning and decision-making activities.
   This chapter details a community-university research project that investigates
the role of the participatory mapping activitiesf,ocusing on the geweb, tosupportthe

contribution and sharing of community members’ spatial knowledge. The research
investigates to what extent online mapping tools and processes can be used by the
Tlowitsis to understand and reconnect with their land-related knowledge and exaim   ne
the ways in which these technologies serve to re-present place-based memories
and facilitate dialogue among community members located in dispersed geographic

settings.



   13.1.1       Place


There is a fundamental connection between Aboriginal people and place (Cajete
1994, 2000; Deloria and Wildcat       2001). From Aboriginal perspectives, places
are complex entities not simply deﬁned by spatial location or physical structure.

Places carry symbolic meaning as moral guides for individual behavior and social
norms (Deloria 2001). A traditional Aboriginal sense of place develops over time
through generations of interaction with and practica elxperience on theland. Itstresses
a process of relationship with place that supports the production and transfer of

knowledge and the maintenance of cultural identity (Cajete     2000 ) . In other words,
an Aboriginal sense of place connects people to the land through both practical and
symbolic relationships.
   Interpretations and understandings of places by individuals and social groups
are never uniform; places are continuously contested and defended (Cresswell

2004; Till 2003). While distinct understandings of place can coexist, they may
also become sources of conﬂict as individuals and groups struggle to control or
13  “I Don’t Come from Anywhere”: Exploring the Role of the Geoweb…              225


transform places and human relationships with those places (Gieryn      2000 ) . This
reﬂects an understanding that places, and people’s relationships with places, are
fraught with tension and never static. Places are deﬁned not only by the people
who live and interact with them but also through the power of others. This leads

Escobar ( 2001, 140) to conclude that we should “understand by place the exper eince
of a particular location with some measure of groundedness (however, unstable),
sense of boundaries (however, permeable), and connection to everyday life, even
if is constructed, traversed by power, and never ﬁxed.”
   Basso contends there is an inextricable link between place and community as

demonstrated through his work with the Western Apache of Cibecue. According
to Basso, “people’s sense of place, their sense of their tribal past, and their vibrant
sense of themselves are inseparably intertwined” (Basso 1996, 35). Other authors
echo this view asserting that meaningful places provide stability and security
(Brown and Perkins 1992), function as “anchors” (Marcu 1992 ) , and becom “symbolic
life lines” (Hummon 1992)and “ﬁelds of care” (Relph       1976 ) for individuals and

communities. These human attachments to place “facilitate a sense of securityw anell-
being, deﬁne group boundaries and stabilize memories against the passage of time”
(Gieryn 2000 , 481).
   While many Aboriginal groups have maintained a continuous and contiguous
physical connection to their ancestral homelands, for others the narrative of place is

one of displacement – of individuals, families, and entire communities compelled,
by force or might or circumstance, to move from their ancestral territories. It is in
this context of displacement and dispersion that place has “become an important
object of struggle in the strategies ofsocial movements…anda criticalrallyingpoint
for indigenous communities” (Escobar 2001 , 139).




   13.1.2       Loss of Place


Given the signiﬁcance of place to people’s lives, it follows that the loss of place
has a profound effect on both a personal level as well as for the social fabric of
communities (Gieryn 2000 ) . Relph   19(6) contends that the experience of displace-
ment, the destruction of places, and other disruptions to human-environmental
relationships can result in placelessness, in other words having no sense of place.
He further notes that mobility can weaken a sense of place, which, in turn, can erode

psychological and emotional ties to a sense of belonging and to community (Relph
1976, 66). Because places “reﬂect and shape peoples’ understandings of who they
are as individuals and members of groups” (Brown and Perkins        1992, 280), the
narratives of those who have experienced the loss of place express a sense of loss
for more than merely the physical location itself, as places are intrinsically tied

to social relationships that occur there (Low  1992, 180). Furthermore, territorial
displacement can result in “disagreement about the nature, origins, and remedies
for the disruption.” Brown and Perkins19(92, 299) explain that this “dissensus impedes
226                                                                          J. Corbett


community action … [and] … is more likely to occur in geographically dispersed
communities.”
   In addition, territorial displacement has been attributed to a weakening of the
kinship, political, and spiritual aspects of community life while also disrupting the

intergenerational transfer of cultural knowledge between elders and youth (Canada
1996, vol. 1, 469; White et al.2003, 26). In somecases, displacement hasbeenfound
to contribute to social and cultural discontinuity that can persist for multiple genera-
tions (Canada 1996, vol. 1, 469). Although the histories, impacts, and symptoms of
displacement are diverse, there is consensus that territorial displacement ruptures

connectivity between people and places and contributes to cultural disintegration
within Aboriginal communities. The Tlowitsis Nation is an example of an Aboriginal
group that has been physically as well as culturally removed from their lands. Tlhoiss
has had, and continues to have, a profound effect on the functioningof thecommunity
and the sense of cohesion between its members.
   The concept of memory is integral to theorizations of both displacement and

placelessness, especially when a sense of place exists only in memory or imagina-
tion for members of dispersed communities. Fentress and Wickham(           1992 , 24)
emphasize that memory “is not a passive receptacle, but instead a process of active
restructuring … [it] represents the past and the present as connected to each other.”
Memory can also become “a social activity and an active binding force of group

identity” (Hoelscher 2003, 658). Similarly, Said(      2000, 179) notes that social
groups rely on memory, “especially in its collective forms…to give themselves a
coherent identity, a national narrative, a place in the world …endowed with political
meaning.” Collective memories deployed to restore, reestablish, repatriate territory,
and reconnect a people with its original homeland reveal the symbolic signiﬁcance

embedded within place, as well as the value of collective memory as a strategy
of resistance and viable political tool. Said(  2000, 182–184) further argues that
memory is increasingly called on to support small groups’ struggles to reestablish
identity, culture, and language and, aboveall, reappropriate historicallyexpropriated
territories and contemporarily contested places.

   The challenge is to ﬁnd ways that enable Aboriginal communities to document,
share, and reﬂect on their place-based memories and knowledge and in doing
so reestablish identity, culture, and language, which in turn will facilitate the reap-
propriation of contested places. Participatory mapping has been used to great effect
to support these goals, and emergent participatorygeoweb applications show further
potential to pursue these aims.




   13.1.3       Maps and Participation


Maps have been used in both a historical and contemporary context to normalize
and reinforce the colonial endeavor (Harley1988) and to perpetuate both intentional
and unintentional lies (Monmonier 1991). Yet, within the discipline, there has been
a growing recognition that cartographers need to explore whether maps should
13  “I Don’t Come from Anywhere”: Exploring the Role of the Geoweb…              227


“be an inherent mirror of majority values or can the play a wider rolein thestruggle
for social improvement” (Harley 1988). Recent trends in GI Science have been
towards the democratization, as well as decolonization, of geographic information

and its associated tools (Dunn  2007). It is increasingly recognized that the process
of map creation can be shifted away from the realm of the professional cartog-
rapher and that this trend is beginning to reach a point where “maps are no longer
imparted to us by a trained cadre of experts, but along with most other information
we createthem as needed ourselves” (Crampton and Krygier   2006, 15). In an Aboriginal

context, this has partially come about through a resounding critique of the colonial,
toxic, underlying nature of mapping and GIS (Eades         2006; Rundstrom 1995 ;
Wainwright and Bryan 2009), but it is also being facilitated by the radical changes
in access toand the usability of new cartographic and geographic information software,
in particular the increasing signiﬁcance of the geoweb.

   The past 25 years have witnessed an explosion of participatory mapping initiatives
throughout the world, in both developing and developed countries (see Alcorn2001 ;
Di Gessa 2008; Poole 1995). Participatory mapping is, in its broadest sense, the
creation of maps by local communities – often with the involvement of supporting
organizations including governments (at various levels), nongovernmental organi-

zations, universities, and other actors engaged in development and land-related
planning (IFAD 2009). Participatory maps provide a valuable visual representation
of what a community perceives as its place and the signiﬁcant features within it.
These include depictions of natural physical features and resources and sociocul-
tural features known by the community. What makes it signiﬁcantly different from

traditional cartography is the process by which the maps are created (i.e., by the
layperson as identiﬁed above by Crampton and Krygier) and the uses to which they
are subsequently put. Ideally participatory mapping focuses on providing the skills
and expertise for community members to contribute the knowledge required to

create the maps themselves, to represent the spatial knowledge of community
members, and to ensure that the map creators determine the ownershipand communi-
cation for the maps.
   The participatory mapping process can inﬂuence the internal dynamics of a com-
munity (Aberley 1993; Chapin et al.2005); it can contribute to building community

cohesion (Corbett and Keller 2005), help stimulate community members to engage
in land-related decision-making, raise awareness about pressing land-related issues
(Peluso 1995), and ultimately contribute to empowering local communities and
their members (Craig et al. 2002). Participatory mapping projects also can take on
an advocacy role and actively seek recognition for community spaces through

identifying traditional lands and resources, demarcating ancestral domain (Brody
1981) and, in some cases, be used as a mechanism to secure tenure (Flavelle 1996 ;
Tobias 2009). Participatory maps play an important role in helping Aboriginal
communities work towards legal recognition of customary land rights. Although
NGOs, from small local to large international ones, often play a crucial role as inter-

locutors, trainers, advocates, and facilitators in community-mapping initiatives
(IFAD 2009  ), it should be noted that maps increasingly are being created by
Aboriginal communities with their own initiativeand without impetusfrom outsiders
228                                                                         J. Corbett


(Tobias2009). This is especially the case with First Nations communities in Western
Canada who see the potential for participatory maps to document their historical
and cultural association with the land in order to inﬂuence land claims and stimulate

interest in local spatial knowledge among their communities’ youth.
   Participatory mapping uses a range of tools that are commonly associated with
participatory learning and action (PLA) initiatives (Corbett et al.2006 ) . These tools
include mental mapping, ground mapping, participatory sketch mapping, transect
mapping, and participatory three-dimensional modeling. More recently, participto ary

mapping initiatives have begun to use more technically advanced geographic infor-
mation technologies including Global Positioning Systems (GPS), aerial photos
and remote-sensed images, Geographic InformationSystems (GIS), andincreasingly
the Geospatial Web (geoweb).
   The geoweb is the geographic platform for Web 2.0 digital social networking

applications. Web 2.0 refers to what many perceive to be a second generation of the
Internet whereby it has become more interactive, allowing users to contribute their
own content, seamlessly communicate and collaborate with one another in real
time, and share or display a variety of qualitative data using a range of media with a
constantly evolving range of web-based of applications. Web 2.0 differs from earlier

models of the Internet, where most users would primarily use the web to retrieve
information, seldom contributing content of their own. The geoweb incorporates
applications such as Google Earth, Google Maps, Microsoft’s Bing Maps, and other
location-based Internet technologies. The geoweb is beginning to have a profound
impact on the way that spatial knowledge is being organized and the extent to which

it is communicated (Cisler 2007; Scharl and Tochtermann 2007 ) . In the geoweb
model, everyone is potentially a contributor, producer, and consumer of geographic
content (Haklay et al. 2008; Sui 2008). Geoweb applications are thus considered
highly democratic due to their ability to enhance citizen access and participation

(Crampton2009; Tulloch2008). The geoweb has achieved broad acceptance, thanks
to its widespread availability on the Internet, its platform independence, and because
it is superﬁcially “free” to use (although there are associated costs, e.g., soveres
claim ownership over data collected through their systems and preserve the right to
reuse it, see Zook and Graham2007). Another reason for the geoweb’s popularity is

its ability to aggregate and present user-generated digital content – referred to as
crowdsourcing (Howe2006; Hudson-Smith et al.2009 ) . Within the ﬁ eld of geography,
this process of citizen-contributed locational information is increasingly referred to
as volunteered geographic information (VGI) (Goodchild 2007 ) . This interactive
functionality allows for a range of community voices and opinions to be shared,

potentially reﬂecting the inherent heterogeneity within communities and supporting
“many-to-many communication” (Ruesch and Bateson 1987 ) .
   Within the emergent ﬁeld of the geoweb and VGI, there appears to be a tension
emerging around whether VGI presents a mechanism to exploit the geoweb’s poten-
tial to capitalize on “citizens as sensors” (Goodchild 2007) or whether the geoweb

continues to support the precedent set by participatory mapping practice, in other
words using maps to support and bring about social and political change (IFA  2009 ) .
Of course these two approaches arenot necessarily oppositional; indeed,the practice
13  “I Don’t Come from Anywhere”: Exploring the Role of the Geoweb…              229


of collecting and utilizing VGI allows for a range of uses and applications. However,
the term is susceptible to misuse; we therefore need to explore how we use the term
in greater detail. For example, much of the initial literature on VGI, as well as the
current practice, focuses on collection but not dissemination of data, the reduction

of knowledge to information (and often times simply data), as wellta hse focus of this
information being provided to experts (or     even corporate entities) and not the
compilation of data to support communication and ultimately the “social improve-
ments” that Harley refers to in the beginning of this section.
   The practice of Aboriginal mapping, which almost universally aims to support

social change and community empowerment, helps frame some important issues
related to using the geoweb as a medium for managing and communicating lotcia   onal
knowledge, but through a lens of colonization, dispossession, and conﬂicting inetsetrs.
To date most of the Internet, as well as geoweb application, reﬂects non-Aboriginal
culture and values, even though a number of Aboriginal scholars have recognized
the potential for it to be appropriated to support an Aboriginal mindset (Wemigwans

2008). There is a need for the VGI debate to take into consideration the linking of
science and Aboriginal ways of thought and expression (e.g., through the geoweb’s
ability to incorporate multiple layers and multiple media) and in doing so consider
the issue of privacy, intellectual property, and knowledge transfer in order to ensure
that VGI does not become another exploitative and colonizing undertaking whereby

community members are reduced to sensors and their knowledge becomes reposi-
tioned as mere data.



   13.2      Research Project


The next section of this chapter introduces a research project that began in October
2010 and remains ongoing at the time of writing this chapter. The project seeks to
explore two areas of research interest: ﬁrstly, how the geoweb represents, mediates,

and transforms the ﬂow of knowledgerelated to these traditional landsand, secondly,
how the notion of authoritative knowledge plays out in the documentation of
Aboriginal VGI on the geoweb. The projectis still in its initialstages; it ispremature
to report deﬁnitive results. However, a number of interesting outcomes have begun
to emerge.
   This project, as with most research undertaken by non-Aboriginal scholars in

Aboriginal contexts, is tainted by a legacy of appropriation and marginalization. In
the past, Aboriginal people have not been consulted about what information should
be collected, who should gather that information, who should maintain it, or who
should have access to it. The information gatheredmay or may not havebeen relevant
to the questions, priorities, or concerns to the people being studied (Canada, vol. 5,

1996 in Schnarch 2004, 82). There is a clear danger that a research project focused
on examining the role of the geoweb and VGI in recording and storing community
knowledge might fall into this classiﬁcation. Therefore, in setting up this research
project, we have attempted to ensure that the Tlowitsis maintain the exclusive
230                                                                       J. Corbett


jurisdiction over their kno wledge and for this to be explicitly acknowledged and
incorporated into project design (both the geoweb component and the research
component) in order to ensure that research proceeds in a manner that is respectful,
relevant, reciprocal, and responsible (Kirkness and Barnhardt1991 ) .

  The methodological approach adopted by this project is community-based
research (CBR). CBR is not so much a set of methods as it is a research philosophy
that emphasizes collaboration over positivist notions of objectivity and neutrality
and the idea that science is apolitical (Hall 1992; Strand et al. 2003 ) . The active
engagement of community members as co-researchers helps to ensure that research

products are more accessible, accountable, and relevantto people’s lives (Israelet al.
1998; Wallerstein and Duran 2008 ) .



   13.2.1      Research Collaborators


The initial phase of this project has been developed by the Treaty Advisory Team,
which included members of the Tlowitsis governing body and researchers from
the Univ ersity of British Columbia Okanagan. The Treaty Advisory Team has
worked directly with two groups within the Tlowitsis Nation – the Tlowitsis Citizens

Advisory Group (TCAG) and the Tlowitsis Elders Advisory Group (TEAG). The
two community groups are comprised of around 20 Tlowitsis members who act as
a representative decision-making and advisory body for the Nation. The TCAG,
formed in June 2008, provides advice and insight related to land and resource
decision-making. The TEAG provides guidance and direction for the TCAG.

The elders are the knowledge holders of historical and cultural information, as well as
of the community’s land-based memories. TCAG members also act as facilitators and
liaisons in community outreach activities; in other words, they deliver the materials
discussed in their group and in the TEAG to other dispersed community members
in locations throughout British Columbia.




   13.2.2      Mapping Process

Since the formation of the TCAG and TEAG, the Treaty Advisory Team has p    droced

a large quantity of digital video, photographic, and text-based materials (Tlowitsis
Nation 2009,2010). These have all been produced, edited, and disseminated through
a collaborative process involving the Treaty Advisory Team and the two community
groups. The video products cover a range of issues, but perhaps most important
for this chapter are the recordings of community elders sharing their land-based

knowledge of their territories. These sessions were convened in community me bmers’
houses. They began with a series of sketch-mapping activities and moved on to
using topographic maps of the Tlowitsis territories to orientate the elders. This was
followed by conversations about memories that directly related to points on the
13  “I Don’t Come from Anywhere”: Exploring the Role of the Geoweb…               231


map; these stories were recorded on video. The map became the medium through
which the elders engaged and reached a level of comfort whereby they were pp    rared
to share their memories. When elders told their stories, their words were punctuated

by vigorous pointing and sweeping arcs drawn over the map as if the map itself was
telling the story and the elder was just the narrator.
   Our process began with sketch maps where community members drew a map
from memory onto paper. They are not to scale but represent the relative position of
features to one another and made an effective icebreaker. The elders love to talk

about Karlukwees, their ancestral village, and sketch mapping provided them with
a way to resituate themselves in that place. They discussed the location of friends
and families’ houses and shared short stories of particular memories located in
speciﬁc places (e.g., “remember the time we built a toboggan and came right dow   the
middle of the village” or “…we would pick clams in this spot”).

   Sketch mapping helped elders remember and begin the process of community
reengagement. However, the impact of the process was limited to the group involved
in the map’s production. Developing a sketch map was also contingent on having
some form of lived experience in the place being mapped; as a result, this tool was
less relevant for the majority of the membership, most of whom have never visited

the Tlowitsis territories.
   The Treaty Advisory Team together with elders also used scale maps, in the form
of marine charts and topographic maps, to locate named features in the landscape
and important resource spots, as well as identify family summer settlements, smoke
houses, staging grounds, and travel routes throughout the territory. These scale maps

were covered in transparent plastic, and the elders’ knowledge was added using
colored nonpermanent marker pens. The material added to these scale maps has
provided vital substance for the creation of a series of Tlowitsis-centric maps of
the territory. They provided precise spatial information that was initially intended

to inform and pique the interest of the urban membership. However, as it turned out,
they became a highly sensitive set of documents that members of the Treaty Advisory
Team determined should be used selectively and strategically at the treaty table
because they were too sensitive to be released into the public where the information
might be used against the nation in the land claims process.

   Much of the information from the sketch and scale mapping exercises has been
incorporated into the Tlowitsis Geographic Information System (GIS). Them    conmity’s
GIS has been used to better understand competing claims over current land use
throughout the region. The GIS also contains data brokered through sharing agree-
ments with the provincial government and resource extraction industries. Using the

GIS, select maps have been created to produce a Tlowitsis atlas for distribution to
government and community members. However, the database remains in the hands
of experts and its contents only made accessible within carefully constructedsm aeisng
that supports the treaty process.
   In the most recent mapping project, which is still in the nascent stage, the Treaty

Advisory Team together with members of the TCAG has begun to explore the
use of the geoweb as a tool for not only one way informationﬂow of the elders
spatial memories to other community members but also as a tool to support a
232                                                                       J. Corbett


map-mediated dialogue on land-related issues among community members. We
have used the geoweb’s ability toaggregate, or mashup, qualitative information and
incorporate video recordings of elders, photographs taken by community members,
and other relevant text documents, and display them directly through a Google
Map’s type interface.

   The Treaty Advisory Team has taken into consideration the requirements
for privacy and the protection of the Tlowitsis knowledge. The University of British
Columbia Okanagan has developed a geoweb tool, called Geolive, to speciﬁcally
address this issue. Geolive is a participatory mapping tool that combines Google
Maps and Joomla! – an open source content management system. The application
allows administrators to set varying levels of user access. Registered users can

create and share their own spatial information using a single dynamic map-based
interface; they can drop information markers onto a map; link these markers to
videos, photos, or text; and turn different data layers on and off as well as take part
in “instant messenger” type discussions. All information added to the map is stored
directly on a server that is housed at the university; the information does not reside
on the cloud (i.e., web-based digital storage services). This gives the administrators

of the Tlowitsis Nation the ability to determine and control exactly who is accessing
what speci ﬁ c information.
   The Tlowitsis geoweb site is now established. We are in the process of seeding
the online map with multimedia information gathered from the earlier TCAG and
TEAG participatory mapping activities, as well as other contributed information
from community members.




   13.3      Discussion


This next section will address two questions raised in the research project section
above:ﬁrstly, how the geoweb represents, mediates, and transforms theﬂow of
knowledge related to Tlowitsis traditional lands and, secondly, how the notion of

authoritative knowledge plays out in the documentation of Aboriginal VGI on the
geoweb. This discussion is informed by initialﬁndings from the implementation
and impact of the Tlowitsis geoweb project. This research project is ongoing at
the time of writing this chapter; therefore, the results presented in this chapter are
only preliminary.




   13.3.1      Exploring the Flow of Knowledge Using Geoweb


Broadly, the application of VGI can be classiﬁed into two areas. The ﬁrst uses VGI
to update, augment, or complement existing spatial databases. Goodchild(     2007 )
refers to these augmented databases as patchworks and notes that the associated
13  “I Don’t Come from Anywhere”: Exploring the Role of the Geoweb…             233


data have been increasingly used toﬁll gaps in governmental databases after it
became too cost prohibitive to collect rapidly changing spatial data themselves.
Academic interest in patchworks concerns debate related to “citizens as sensors,”
data accuracy, and validity as well as issues of interoperability through the combin-

ing of “ofﬁcial” data with publicly contributed data. The second area of VGI relates
to the creation of novel forms of knowledge production that can be used to foster
new social and political practices (Elwood2008). It is this second set of applications
that has caused academics to speculate that VGI is changing the way that society
views and interacts with spatial data, the knowledge politics of geographic informa-

tion, and relations to these data (Elwood 2010). It is this second area of VGI that
closely relates to the focus of the Tlowitsis geoweb project.



   13.3.2      Volunteered Information vs. Aboriginal Knowledge


There remains a fundamental tension that is closely tied to the focus of VGI, and
more broadly Web 2.0 and the geoweb, and the nature of Aboriginal knowledge.
This tension relates to the fact that many applications are speciﬁcally designed to
support the uninhibited sharing of volunteered information, however whimsical

(Keen 2007), whether this is information about a user’s location, their photographs
and videos, or simply broadcasting their mood and feelings. The focus ofthe majority
of these applications is on ease of use and unfettered access to other users’ informa-
tion. Aboriginal knowledge, however, is not whimsical, nor is it a commodity to
be shared indiscriminately. Aboriginal knowledge is “a key element of the social

capital of the poor and constitutes their main asset in their efforts to gain control of
their own lives” (World 2002, 1), and the process of knowledge acquisition is in
itself of intrinsic value, which in turn shapes the long-term likelihood of its survival.
   The words “information” and “knowledge,” although often used interchangeably,
are distinguishable. Information “takes the shape of structured and formatted datasets

that remain passive and inert until used by those with the knowledge needed to inter-
pret and process them” (David and Foray2002, 12). In this sense information remains
close to the concept of citizens volunteering locational data as sensors (Goodchild
2007; Coleman and Georgiadou 2009). Knowledge is the understanding that people
derive from that information. It is neither objective nor static, but is ever changing and
infused with the principles and the daily realities faced by those who .eKnowledge

used in this context is not jterebral but includesvalues, beliefs,skills, attitudes, and
practices (UNDP   1999 ) . Furthermore A,boriginal knowledge is owned and shared
collectively within a local community (Greaves 1996 ) . Thik   snowledge has been
accumulated over time by successive generations.These communities have used this
knowledge to sustain themselves and to maintain their cultural identity (Johnson

1992). In other words, it is considerably different in both nature and custom from the
types of VGI gathered to augment government databases, as well as the types of quali-
tative and highly personal information that are commonly shared using locationally
aware social networking applications. For ma ynTlowitsis members, social networking
234                                                                          J. Corbett


applications are tools that are used for entertainment and communication by the youth.
They are not considered serious tools; for this to happen, there needs to be a shift in
the users’ perception. For the geoweb to become an effective tool for dispersed com-
munity members to learn land-related knowledge about the Tlowitsis territory, the

users will need to perceive the tool, as well as the contained knowledge, sincerely as
well as interact with it in a serious way.



   13.3.3       Aboriginal Knowledge and the Public Domain


Knowledge is often given meaning and value through its cultural setting and inter-
pretation (Brodnig and Mayer-Schönberger 2000 ) . Stevenson19(97 ) stated that it
is the spiritual dimension that determines how Aboriginal knowledge is collected,
managed, and transmitted and it is this dimension that sets it apart from basic
information that anyone can acquire through observing and experiencing their
environment. As a result, this knowledge at timeiss “providing a world viewofwhich

outsiders are rarely aware, and at best can only incompletely grasp” (Greaves1996 ) .
This complicates the codiﬁcation andrecording and thereforecommunication ofthis
knowledge. Presenting sensitive land-based knowledge through the geoweb, ec     siaelly
if it becomes understood as simply volunteered information, might serve to render
it irrelevant, inappropriate, or even harmful (especially given the signi ﬁ cance and

sensitivity of information and its use and/or misuse in the British Columbia Treaty
context). Following a legacy of external domination over the Tlowitsis lands and
natural resources, the community is concerned that this is not followed by the appro-
priation of knowledge without proper acknowledgment of the communities from
where it originates (Brush 1996). There has been a persistent fear within the Treaty

Advisory Team that any information presented on the web, in particular sensitive
land-related knowledge, cannot be controlledT . he information mightbe transformed,
used selectively, and reused in ways that at this point in time cannot even be iiaed.
Despite the attention given to restrict the  information’s availability in the public
domain and to maintain privacy throughthe design of various levels of access using
Geolive, this fear has remained throughout the duration of the project.

   Trust is a major theme affecting peoples’ willingness to participate in many
social networks. In general, the more trust users have of an application, the more
they will participate and the more they will be willing to share (Boyd and Ellison
2008). Although there remains a clear desire to implement the geoweb tool by the
Tlowitsis (particularly by the youth), and although it is recognized that community

wide collaboration and the collective geo-wikiﬁcation of the community’s knowl-
edge is desirable, there remains a fundamental distrust of the Internet as a whole and
by association the geoweb. This distrust is directly related to the fear of losing
control over their land-related knowledge. Elwood (2008) notes that not all users are
fully aware of the potential uses of their volunteered geographic data. However,

many Aboriginal communities in Canada are already highly sensitized to the poten-
tial that their data will be appropriated and misused because this has occurred
13  “I Don’t Come from Anywhere”: Exploring the Role of the Geoweb…              235


numerous times in their colonized past. As a result many Tlowitsis community
members are deeply cynical about the potential application of tools that facilitate
the sharing of this knowledge, especially when organizations such as universities,
who are often perceived as expropriators of knowledge, are involved in facilitating

its acquisition. In consideration of this, most Tlowitsis community members
involved in the project would rather apply the precautionary principle and carefully
restrict the types of spatial knowledge communicated through the geoweb.



   13.3.4       The Role of Authoritative Aboriginal Knowledge
           and the Geoweb


 Goodchild 2(007, 29) contends “the world of VGI is chaotic, with little in the way of
formal structures. Information is constantly being created and cross-referenced, and
ﬂows in all directions, since producersand consumers are nolonger distinguishable.”
This raises the question of the extent to which VGI can ever be considered autthatiev

in documenting spatial data, as well as representing qualitative spatial information.
This issue is particularly important when users are unrelated and anonymous or
assume “virtual” personas. However, our research has begun to show that the
issues of authoritative information and the contested nature of knowledge are also
signiﬁcant to Tlowitsis members who, despite physical separation, still retain a

strong sense of shared culture and history.
   Commonly, VGI is viewed as being nonauthoritative and therefore something
to use, but not rely on. As Goodchild ( 2007, 31) asserts, “missing at this point are
the mechanisms needed to ensure quality, to detect and remove errors.” Grira and
Bédard 2 (009) further note that every Internet user has different requirements and

expectations of quality; this relates to both the material that they obtain through the
Internet as well as information that they contribute. In the same way that Goodchild
and Grira and Bédard recognize a signiﬁcant variety in data quality, the Tlowitsis
members also identify that the content and details of their own memories and local
spatial knowledge vary considerably between different families and individuals;
since the diaspora, these differences have become even more marked.

    Cresswell 2(004)stresses that interpretations and understandings of places by
individuals and social groups are never uniform; places are continuously contested
and positions defended. Both elders and members of the TCAG expressed similar
concerns about contested memories of place and the Tlowitsis geoweb project.
Some felt that openly sharing spatial memories using the geoweb has the potential

to expose contested recollections and exacerbate discordance in a way that would
not emerge using nondigital, face-to-afce forms of participatorymapping techniques.
This is because of the inability of the web medium to fully support a running
dialogue, to be able to explain the purpose and intent behind information shared
through the web interface, as well as talk one’s way through disagreements and

misunderstandings, all core elements of nondigital participatory mapping activities.
Although Geolive is designed to enable online “instant messenger” type convetrisoans,
236                                                                          J. Corbett


it clearly lacks the subtlety and nuance of face-to-face discussion. Given the sensiitty
around memories that reﬂect such a painful past, also taking into account that there
is a clear disruption in the intergenerational transfer of cultural knowledge between
elders and youth, there is a danger that the sharing of information in an open and

unmediated manner will serve to alienate and perhaps even anger some community
members. The geoweb therefore has the potential to exacerbate the same rift between
community members that the project attempts to overcome.
   Within the VGI literature, there is considerable debate related to spatial data
accuracy being diminished when collected and submitted by amateurs (Grira and

Bédard  2009), as well as discussion related tevaluating its quality inan environment
where “standard conventions of determining credibility break down” (Flanagin and
Metzger 2008, 140). Web 2.0 applications seek to enable a less vertical assessment
of information quality; in other words, they allow the collective wisdom of all users
to play a signiﬁcant role in the arbitration of data credibility. In many VGI apptliiocnas,
individual user credibility builds around the perceived and relative trustworthiness

as identiﬁed by the majority of users. Credibility is determined through rating stys s
where reliability of volunteered data is openly assessed. The content and tone of
this form of evaluation, although most often serious, can be humorous, glib,
confrontational, and at times demeaning. In many Aboriginal communities this form
of evaluation is far removed from a past that deeply respected the position of knowl-

edge holders and in particular elders. This form of open judgment has also served to
silence a number of Tlowitsis community members, including elders, not only
because they fear being judged to be wrong but because they recognize the variance
in memories held by different individuals and families and are concerned about
presenting their stories, histories, and memories in a manner that might be construed

as being authoritative and/or deﬁnitive, and thus in conﬂict with other views.
   In conclusion, the Treaty Advisory Team have recognized that it is important for
the project to proceed with extreme caution and to explicitly acknowledge that the
geoweb might be best used as a tool to reconnect community members and to start
to develop relationships and an active online community, but not yet to treat the

geoweb as a tool to transfer land-related knowledge – especially if that knowledge
is in any way related to the ongoing Treaty process.



   13.4       Conclusions


When members of the Treaty Advisory Team examined the project from a short
term “project scope” perspective, we feel that both the earlier participatory mapping
activities and the geoweb project have been superﬁcially successful in engaging
elders and generating interest in land-related knowledge among members of the

TCAG and more broadly in the community. In doing so, the project has helped
move the dispersed community towards, as Cajete (2000) notes, a relationship with
place that supports the production and transfer of knowledge and the maintenance
of cultural identity. Elders have been willing to share limited place-based memories
13  “I Don’t Come from Anywhere”: Exploring the Role of the Geoweb…            237


and other spatial knowledge from the territory. That information in turn has been
incorporated into the geoweb component of the Tlowitsis web site and thus communi-
cated to other community members through both direct viewing of the web site and

facilitated training workshops. During a series of training workshops, community
members have used the geoweb interface to comment on how they have appreciated
learning more about the lands that they have never visited. So, at least outwardly, the
tool has become “a social activity and an active binding force of group identity”
(Hoelscher  2003 , 658).

   However, in regard to longer-term outcomes associated with using the geoweb
to “rediscover a sense of place,” it is too early to comment given the newness and
current reach of the project. We recognize that presently the Tlowitsis geoweb proj-
ect has limited ability to bring about systemic social and/or political change within
the community. The information presented on the map and the ability to interact with

this information and other community members through the geoweb medium will
never substitute for the need for community members to physically interact with
their lands and each other. The geoweb’s strength lies in its capacity to offer an
intermediary, albeit superﬁcial, step in the process towards reestablishing a
deeper connection to the land through the memories, stories, and multimedia dis-

played on the geoweb map. However, the impact of these stories and collective
memories on their own to “foster a sense of community, identity and belonging”
(Basso 1996, 31) remains limited.
   The Tlowitsis geoweb project has proven an effective way to repurpose existing
qualitative multimedia material, especially digital videos and photographs gathered

by members of the Treaty Advisory Team and other community members over
the past 5 years. This multimedia information is made available to the dispersed
membership through a geoweb interface. However, to date there has been little
contribution to the map from community members that are not a part of the TCAG

and TEAG. This is partially because the project is currently in its infancy; horre,
the Treaty Advisory Team has not yet widely promoted the geoweb component of
the web site through a community outreach campaign. We also recognize that the
Tlowitsis geoweb portal illustrates a disconnect that exists within the community in
regard to sharing of experiences related to the land – notably that most dispersed

community members have no background or practical experience on the land an   tdus
no memories to share. Beyond contributing their personal insights and experiences
related to being removed from the land, which they are already doing on the existing
web site forum, there is little spatial information and few memories to share. Thus,
the geoweb becomes a tool for them to learn directly from the elders’ knowledge

that the Treaty Advisory Team has seeded on the site. At this stage of the project’s
development, the geoweb site reﬂects a unidirectionalﬂow of information, rather
than the participatory “many-to-many communication” (Ruesch and Bateson     1987 )
that we had initially envisaged. As the project develops, a core research objective
will be to examine the types of comments, stories, and experiences that the general

community membership posts on the site. However, at this stage the geoweb project
more closely emulates how knowledge was traditionally passed between genetriaons,
in other words from elders to younger generations.
 238                                                                               J. Corbett


    In conclusion, this chapter stresses that within Aboriginal contexts, there is a
 fundamental difference between information and knowledge. This difference sg          uegsts

 a need for extreme caution in the deployment of the geoweb to record and communi-
 cate Aboriginal land-based memories. It is essential tha    tte Tlowitsis geoweb project,

 as well as similarly motivated projects, does not serve to further disempower the
 community through inadvertently (and often unintentionally) facilitating the loss of
 control over their own knowledge. Researchers and practitioners alike need to

 be conscious that these tools can potentially cause further erosion of community
 cohesion through memories being construed in contentious ways that ultimately
 become uncontrollable. There is a critical need for the geoweb to incorporate feed-

 back mechanisms that facilitate multiple pathways of communication in order to
 introduce this new technology in a culturally appropriate and meaningful manner.


  Acknowledgments This chapter could not have been written without both the commitment to
 research and the ﬁnancial support of the Tlowitsis Treaty Ofﬁce, in particular the Chief Negotiator
 Ken Smith and Treaty researcher Zach Romano. Furthermore, it reﬂects the views of many
 Tlowitsis members who have been, and continue to be, overwhelmingly gracious in sharing their

 time, experiences, and involvement. The Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of
 Canada funds the geoweb project described in this chapter. Geolive has been developed using
 funding from the GEOIDE network Project 41.




      References


   Aberley, D. (1993B)o.undaries of home: Mapping for local empowerment. Gabriola Island: New
     Society Publishers.

   Alcorn, J. B. (200B1).rders, rules and governance: Mapping to catalyse changes in policy and
     management. London: International Institute for Environment and Development.
   Basso, K. (1996 W).isdom sits in places: Landscape and language among the western apache  .
     Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
 Boyd, D. M., & Ellison, N. B. (2008). Social network sites: Deﬁnition, history, and scholarship.
     Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 13 (1), 210–230.

 Brodnig, G., & Mayer-Schönberger, V. (2000). Bridging the gap: The role of spatial information
     technologies in the integration of traditional environmental knowledge and western science.
     The Electronic Journal on Information Systems in Developing Countries, 1 , 1–16.
   Brody, H. (1981M ).aps and dreams: Indians and the British Columbia frontier . New York:
     Pantheon Books.
 Brown, B., & Perkins, D. (1992). Disruptions in place attachment. In I. Altman & S. Low (Eds.),
     Place attachment (pp. 279–304). New York: Plenum Press.

  Brush, S. B. (1996). Whose knowledge, whose genes, whose rights? In S. B. Brush & D. Stabinsky
     (Eds.),Valuing local knowledge: Indigenous people and intellectual property righ.tsWashington,
     DC: Island Press.
   Cajete, G. (199L4o).ok to the mountain: An ecology of indigenous educatio.nSkyland: Kivaki Press.
   Cajete, G. (2000N)a.tive science: Natural laws of interdependence. Skyland: Kivaki Press.
   Canada (1996)R.oyal commission on aboriginal peoples .Volume 1: Looking forward, looking

     back. Ottawa: Canada Communication Group.  http://www.collectionscanada.gc.ca/webarchives
     /20071115053257/http://www.ainc-inac.gc.ca/ch/rcap/sg/sgmm_e.html . Accessed July 2011.
Chapin, M., Lamb, M., & Threlkeld, B. (2005). Mapping indigenous land.     Annual Review of
     Anthropology, 34 , 619–638.
 13   “I Don’t Come from Anywhere”: Exploring the Role of the Geoweb…                          239


    Cisler, S. (2007).en geography: New tools and new initiatives. Santa Clara: Center for Science

     Technology and Society, Santa Clara University.
 Coleman, D. J., Georgiadou, Y., & Labonte, J. (2009). Volunteered geographic information: The
     nature and motivation of producers.    International Journal of Spatial Data Infrastructures
     Research, 4 , 332–358.

 Corbett, J. M., & Keller, C. P. (2005). An analytical framework to examine empowerment assoacteid
     with participatory geographic information systems (PGIS). Cartographica: The International
     Journal for Geographic Information and Geovisualization, 40 (4), 91–102.
Corbett, J. M., Rambaldi, G., Kyem, P., Weiner, D., Olsen, R., Muchemi, J., & Chambers, R.

     (2006). Overview – Mapping for change the emergence of a new practice.           Participatory
     Learning and Action, 54 , 13–20.
  Craig, W. J., Harris, T. M., & Weiner, D. (20C). mmunity participation and geographic infomration
     systems. London/New York: Taylor and Francis.

 Crampton, J. (2009). Cartography maps 2.0. Progress in Human Geography, 3 (1), 91–100.
 Crampton, J., & Krygier, J. (2006). An introduction to critical cartography. ACME, 4 (1), 11–33.
    Cresswell, T. (2004P)l.ace: A short introduction. Malden: Blackwell.
David, P. A., & Foray, D. (2002). An introduction to the economy of the knowledge society.

     International Social Science Journal, 54 (March), 9–23.
 Deloria, V. (2001). American Indian metaphysics. In V. Deloria & D. Wildcat (Eds.), Power and
     place: Indian education in America (pp. 1–6). Golden: Fulcrum Publishing.
  Deloria, V., & Wildcat, D. (2001).ower and place: Indian education in America. Golden: Fulcrum

     Publishing.
 Di Gessa, S. (2008). Participatory mapping as a tool for empowerment: Experiences and lessons
     learned from the ILC network. Rome: International Land Coalition.    http://www.landcoalition.
     org/pdf/08_ILC_Participatory_Mapping_Low.pdf      . Accessed July 2011.

  Dunn, C. (2007). Participatory GIS: A people’s GISP?rogress in Human Geography, 31(5), 617–638.
  Eades, G. L. (2006)D. ecolonizing geographic information systems. MA thesis, Carleton University,
     Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
 Elwood, S. (2008). Volunteered geographic information: Key questions, concepts and methods to

     guide emerging research and practice. GeoJournal, 72 , 133–135.
 Elwood, S. (2010). Geographic information science: Emerging research on the societal implica-
     tions of the geospatial web. Progress in Human Geography, 34 (3), 349–357.
Escobar, A. (2001). Culture sits in places: Reﬂections on globalism and subaltern strategies of

     localization. Political Geography, 20 (2), 139–174.
 Fentress, J., & Wickham, C. (1992). Social memory. Oxford: Blackwell.
 Flanagin, A. J., & Metzger, M. J. (2008). The credibility of volunteered geographic information.
     GeoJournal, 72 (3), 137–148.

    Flavelle, A. (1996C)o.mmunity mapping handbook. Vancouver: Lone Pine Foundation.
 Gieryn, T. (2000). A space for place in sociology. Annual Review of Sociology, 26 (1), 463–496.
 Goodchild, M. F. (2007). Citizens as voluntary censors: Spatial data infrastructure in the world of
     web 2.0. International Journal of Spatial Data Infrastructures Research, 2 , 24–32.

 Greaves, T. (1996). Tribal rights. In S. B. Brush & D. Stabinsky (Eds.), Valuing local knowledge:
     Indigenous people and intellectual property rights. Washington, DC: Island Press.
  Grira, J., & Bédard, Y. (2009). Spatial data uncertainty in the VGI world: Going from consumer to
     producer. Geomatica, 64 (1), 61–71.

Haklay, M., Singleton, A., & Parker, C. (2008). Web mapping 2.0: The neogeography of the
     GeoWeb. Geography Compass, 2 (6), 2011–2039.
 Hall, B. (1992). From margins to center? The development and purpose of participatory research.
     The American Sociologist, 23 (4), 15–28.

Harley, J. B. (1988). Maps, knowledge and power. In D. Cosgrove (Ed.),         The iconography of
     landscape (pp. 277–312). Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Hoelscher, S. (2003). Making place, making race: Performances of whiteness in the Jim Crow
     South. Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 93 (3), 657–686.
 Howe, J. (2006). The rise of crowdsourcing. Wired, 14 (6), 176–183.
 240                                                                                     J. Corbett


  Hudson-Smith, A., Batty, M., Crooks, A., & Milton, R. (2009). Mapping for the masses: Accessing

     web 2.0 through crowdsourcing. Social Science Computer Review, 27 (4), 1–15.
 Hummon, D. (1992). Community attachment: Local sentiment and sense of place. In I. Altman &
     S. Low (Eds.), Place attachment (pp. 279–304). New York: Plenum Press.
   IFAD. (2009)G  . ood practices in participatory mapping . Rome: The International Fund for

     Agricultural Development (Prepared by J. M. Corbett, 2009).
  Israel, B., Schulz, A., Parker, E., & Becker, A. (1998). Review of community based research: Assessing
     partnership approaches to improve public healthA. nnual Review of Public Health, 19, 173–202.
   Johnson, M. (1992  L)o.re: Capturing traditional environmental knowledge. Ottawa: International

     Development Research Centre.
   Keen, A. (2007  T)h.e cult of the amateur: How today’s internet is killing our culture . New York:
     Doubleday.
 Kirkness, V. J., & Barnhardt, R. (1991). First nations and higher education: The 4 Rs – respect,

     relevance, reciprocity, responsibility. Journal of American Indian Education, 30 (3), 1–15.
Low, S. (1992). Symbolic ties that bind: Place attachment in the plaza. In I. Altman & S. Low
     (Eds.), Place attachment (pp. 279–304). New York: Plenum Press.
 Marcus, C. (1992). Environmental memories. In I. Altman & S. Low (Eds.),        Place attachment

     (pp. 279–304). New York: Plenum Press.
   Monmonier, M. (1991    H).w to lie with maps. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
 Peluso, N. L. (1995). Whose woods are these? Counter-mapping forest territories in Kalimantan,
     Indonesia. Antipode, 27 (4), 383–406.

 Poole, P. (1995). Geomatics, who needs it? Cultural Survival Quarterly, 18 (4), 1–77.
   Relph, E. (1976 P)l.ace and placelessness. London: Pion.
 Ruesch, J., & Bateson, G. (1987).Communication: The social matrix of psychiatry. New York: W.
     W. Norton and Company.

Rundstrom, R. A. (1995). GIS, indigenous peoples, and epistemological diversity.      Cartography
     and Geographic Information Systems, 22 (1), 45–57.
 Said, E. W. (2000). Invention, memory, and place. Critical Inquiry, 26 (2), 175–192.
  Scharl, A., & Tochtermann, K. (2007).The geospatial web: How geobrowsers, social software and

     the Web 2.0 are shaping the network society. New York: Springer.
Schnarch, B. (2004). Ownership, control, access, and possession (OCAP) or self-determination
     applied to research: A critical analysis of contemporary ﬁrst nations research and some options
     for ﬁrst nations communities. Journal of Aboriginal Health, 1 (1), 80–95.

     Stevenson, M. G. (1997). Ignorance and prejudice threaten environmental asseP           ssleynt.
     Options, 18 (2), 25–28.
 Strand, K., Donohue, P., & Stoecker, R. (2003).Community-based research and higher education:
     Principles and practices. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

 Sui, D. (2008). The wikiﬁcation of GIS and its consequences: Or Angelina Jolie’s new tattoo and
     the future of GIS. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 32 , 1–5.
 Till, K. (2003). Places of memory. In J. Agnew, K. Mitchell, & G. Toal (Eds.),   A companion to
     political geography (pp. 230–251). New York: Wiley-Blackwell.

   Tlowitsis Nation. (2009 T)l.owitsis nation lands and resources: Planning for the future . Kelowna:
     The Centre for Social, Spatial and Economic Justice.
   Tlowitsis Nation. (2010T)l.owitsis governance: Values from the past, vision for the future      .
     Kelowna: The Centre for Social, Spatial and Economic Justice.

   Tobias, T. (200L9i)v.ing proof: The essential data-collection guide for indigenous use-andpcauncy
     map surveys. Vancouver: Union of BC Indian Chiefs and Ecotrust Canada.
Tulloch, D. (2008). Is volunteered geographic information participation?     GeoJournal, 72 (3/4),
     161–171.

   UNDP. (1999A   ).guidebook for ﬁeld projects: Participatory research for sustainable livelihood .
     New York: United Nations Development Program.
Wainwright, J., & Bryan, J. (2009). Cartography, territory, property: postcolonial reﬂections on
     indigenous counter-mapping in Nicaragua and Belize. Cultural Geographies, 16 , 153–178.
  13   “I Don’t Come from Anywhere”: Exploring the Role of the Geoweb…                          241


  Wallerstein, N., & Duran, B. (2008). The theoretical, historical and practical roots of CBPR. In

     M. Minkler & N. Wallerstein (Eds.),     Community based participatory research for health
     (pp. 25–46). San Francisco: Jossey Bass.
Wemigwans, J. (2008). Indigenous worldviews: Cultural expression on the world wide web.
     Canadian Woman Studies, 26 (3/4), 31.

  White, J., Beavon, K., & Maxim, P. (2003). Aboriginal conditions: Research as a foundation for
     public policy. Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press.
    World Bank. (2002T)h .e exchange of indigenous knowledge. New York: World Bank.      http://www.
     worldbank.org/html/afr/ik/exchange.htm   . Accessed May 2005.

  Zook, M., & Graham, M. (2007). The creative reconstruction of the Internet: Google and th tieptrvao
     of cyberspace and DigiPlace. Geoforum, 38 , 1322–1343.
                            Part III
Emerging Applications and New
                     Challenges
   Chapter 14

Potential Contributions and Challenges

of VGI for Conventional Topographic
Base-Mapping Programs



    David J. Coleman






 AbstractThis chapter introduces the context and characteristics implicit in

conventional digital topographic mapping programs and then contrasts them to
important underlying assumptions regarding volunteered geographic information. It
deﬁnes the term “authoritative data” and challenges its use in the context of compre-
hensive topographic base-mapping programs. After examining prevailing cultures
and assumptions that must be adjusted and workﬂows that must be modiﬁed tagaen

risk and make the best use of VGI in this role, case studies from the state of Victoria,
Australia; the United States Geological Survey; and TomTom describe the early
experiences of conventional mapping organizations in this regard. The author
contends that VGI is not the ultimate solution to all geospatial data updating and
maintenance challenges now faced by mapping organizations. However, it does

represent an important potential channel of such updates that needs to be investi-
gated seriously and implemented responsibly.



      14.1      Introduction


Use of volunteered geographic information (VGI) by public and private comprehensive
mapping organizations is now either under way or under consideration. As mersum
2011, Google Map Maker provided citizens in 188 jurisdictions with the ability to
help populate and update Google Maps’ graphical and attribute data (Google2011 ) .

OpenStreetMap ,TomTom, and NAVTEQ all routinely use volunteer contributions to
maintain their databases (Coleman et al.2010). In Australia, the Victoria State



  D. J. Cole*a) (
  Department of Geodesy and Geomatics Engineering ,
University of New Brunswick , Fredericton NB , Canada
e-mail: dcoleman@unb.ca


D. Sui et al. (eds.), Crowdsourcing Geographic Knowledge: Volunteered Geographic
Information (VGI) in Theory and Practice, DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-4587-2_14,
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
246                                                                      D.J. Coleman


Government now permits (registered) individual government employees to update
state-level mapping features and attributes.
   Volunteered geographic information or VGI aintd s related terms hae been discussed

at length in other chapters of this book. The more general concepts of “user-gen aerd
content,” “user-created content,” and “crowdsourcing” are well documented (OECD
2007 ) , and Coo2k00(8) offers a taxonomy of both passive and active “user conu trtonb
systems” in the consumer market. In addition to the better-referenced works deﬁning
neogeography and VGI by Turner (2007 ) and Goodchil2        d00(7 ) , respectively, more

recent articles by Coote and Rackham (  2008 ) , Grira et a2l.10 ) , and Heipk2 e01(0 )
also do an excellent job of examining VGI contributors and their contributions.
   Coote and Rackham( 2008)describe neogeographic datasets as possessing the
following characteristics:

• Creation has been stimulated by a lack of available data or by frustrations with
   costs, restrictions, and limitations of existing conventional data sources.
• They involve the capture, processing, and dissemination of geographic inform   tian

   provided voluntarily by individuals.
• Approaches to creation and management are neither intuitive nor necessarily tied
   to accepted standards or methods.
• Data is licensed using some open-source approach, which allows for users to
   consume the data without charge provided the original creator is acknowledged

   and any other user can do the same with anything you produce.
   Web-enabled VGI has been used extensively over the past 3 years to support

emergency operations by mapping the extent of affected areas, highlighting
important incidents, and documenting disaster-recovery operations (e.g., Zook
et al. 2010; Heinzelman and Waters 2010; Roche et al. 2011 ) . As companies like
Google, TomTom, and NAVTEQ have already discovered (Coleman et al.             2010 ) ,

the potential exists for government mapping agencies to harness the power of Web
2.0, new media, and voluntarism in order to improve their own change-detection
and geospatial data-updating processes.
   There has been no shortage of online discussion regarding whether and how
public-sector mapping and charting organizations might employ VGI in their map

production, updating and even enriching the attributes of selected features (e.C.,sey
2009; Dobson2010b; Ball 2010 ) . There has ab     lseoen interest from nationalgovern-
ment organizations in examining the role and potential of employing VGI in their
map updating and enrichment of attributes (e.g., Guélat       2009 ) . However, such
efforts are still in their early stages.

   This chapter will review the potential advantages and challenges of using volun-
teered geographic information as a tool in the updating and elaboration of features
contained in government and commercial mapdatabases. After examiningprevailing
cultures and assumptions that must be adjusted, as well as workﬂows that must be
modiﬁed before making the best use of VGI in this role, the author discusses how

existing developments are already answering important questions posed by conven-
tional mapping organizations.
14  Potential Contributions and Challenges of VGI for Conventional Topographic..247


   14.2      Challenges Faced by Professional Mapping Organizations


The missions, mandates, accomplishments, and perceived shortcomings of national
mapping organizations have been well documented (e.g., Andrews     1970; Hardy and
Johnston 1982; Cowen et al. 2003). Since the products maintained by these organi-
zations are regarded as important information assets, most of these organizations

have had to be responsive to users regarding, for example, how best to impr     ove
the content and currency of their products, update data structures to allow for more
extensive geographical analyses, andmodify pricing policies anddistribution infra-
structure to facilitate online access and increase downloads—all to meet a broad
range of evolving requirements and technologies.




   14.2.1       What Is “Authoritative Data”?

The term “authoritative data” has been used to describe products produced by

professional mapping organizations (Goodchil2  d009; Coleman et al2. 010; Ball2010 ) .
However, no deﬁnitions of the word “authoritative” are offered in those articles.
   One possibility is offered by Van der Molen and Wubbe(      2007 ) in discussing
government policy in the Netherlands. The authors describe the creation and desig-
nation of six key datasets as ofﬁcial “authentic” national registers, each of which was

deﬁned as “… a high quality database accompanied by explicit guarantees ensuring
for its quality assurance that, in view of the entirety of statutory duties, contains
essential and/or frequently-used data pertaining to persons, institutions, issues,
activities or occurrences and which is designated by law as the sole ofﬁcially recog-
nised register of the relevant data to be used by all government agencies and, if possi-
ble, by private organisation’s [ sic] throughout the entire country, unless important

reasons such as the protection of privacy explicitly preclude the use of the register.”
   In this context, two of the ﬁrst six authentic registers were in fact geographically
related—the cadastral registers and maps, and the 1:10,000-scale topographic base
mapping (Kadaster International 2007 ) .
   Nautical charts in some countries are recognized to be “authoritative” documents

(Fisheries and Oceans Canada     2011; LINZ 2011   ). They are updated regularly
through “notices to mariners,” and in some countries, producers or value-added
repackagers of electronic nautical chart data may assume some liability in the event
charts contain erroneous or out-of-date information (Obloy and Sharetts-Sullivan
1994). Similarly, aeronautical charts are updated regularly, and their updating

has long been conducted by specialists possessing a “…comprehensive and authorita-
tive personal knowledge” of reliable source materials and cartographic activities
in a given area (UNECA 1966 ) .
   It can be appreciated how regularly maintained cadastral maps, nautical charts,
aeronautical charts, and even local zoning maps may be seen to be “authoritative”

sources of public information within a jurisdiction. Beyond the Netherlands,
however, there is little mentionin other countries offormally recognized“authentic”
248                                                                    D.J. Coleman


or “authoritative”topographicmap series that would adhere to a similar deﬁnitioni.hW
the exception of the Ordnance Survey of Great Britain, most national government
mapping agencies have neither the funding nor the mandate to keep their mapping
databases current within speciﬁed time frames. Budgets for topographic digital

map maintenance activities in some jurisdictions areeither declining or nonexistent.
The larger the country’s size, the older some of its base mapping is likely to be.
   With more up-to-date mapped information now available online from other
sources, referring to national or regional government topographic mapping     data-
bases as being “authoritative” has become misleading in some cases. The practice

is also becoming a source of division and controversy within the geospatial user
community when examining the relative merits and uses of volunteered geographic
information (Ball 2010; van der Vlugt 2011 ) .
   Coote and Rackham( 2008)offer the term “conventional” as an alternative to
“authoritative” and suggest the following characteristics of conventional datasets:

• Created for a speciﬁc and deﬁned set of requirements whether for legal, administra-
   tive, or commercial purposes.
• Depending on the context, these may or may not be freely available, but usually

   there is at least some dissemination charge and, most likely, restrictions on access
   and use.
• Managed by organizations establishedfor the purpose, whetheras publicor com-
   mercial bodies. There may be collaboration between organizations but on the
   basis of legal agreements including commercial contracts.

• Collected by professional staff who are paid to do so.
• Based on established methods, standards, speciﬁcations, and practices.
• Quality assured to varying degreesduring the production of thedata andsupplied
   with some information, however basic, on the quality of the data.
• Protected by some form of copyright and governed by formal agreements or

   licenses.
• Access limited, in many cases, to only certain organizations or individuals for
   reasons of security, data protection, or commercial advantage.

   While some of these points are UK speciﬁc—and more conventional data may be
“freely” available now than when their paper was presented—these characteristics
can be seen in government topographic mapping products across Europe, North
America, and Australasia. Accordingly, the adjective “conventional” rather than
“authoritative” will be used through the remainder of this chapter to describe com-

prehensive base-mapping programs.



   14.2.2      Implications of Aerial Mapping on the Characteristics
           of Conventional Base Mapping


Since 1945—and well before in developed countries—most national topographical
map series have been produced by photogrammetric means using aerial surveys.
  14  Potential Contributions and Challenges of VGI for Conventional Topographic...  249


  As a result, some important characteristics of the products involved must be kept
  in mind:

 1. Data compilation has been done remotely by trained mapping technicians who
     may possess only a limited knowledge of the features in the area being mapped.
  2. Mapped features are classiﬁed into relatively broad categories, with their corre-

     sponding range of attributes often limited to what can be determined from photo
     interpretation and a limited set of support documents.
  3. Prior to any data structuring and logical consistency considerations, preliminary
     quality assurance concerns in map compilation center on (a) proper rectiﬁcation
     of imagery or restitution of stereo models in advance of the mapping, (b) gm  eetri-

     cally accurate representation of the center or selected edges of a given feature
     (e.g., roof lines rather than building footprints), and (c) correct classiﬁcation
     and coding of features in accordance with the given classiﬁcation scheme.
4.Field veriﬁcation and completion of the mapping content is labor intensive,
     depends on available program funding, and may vary widely within and between

     programs depending on prevailing budget considerations.
 5.Production and subsequent updating are organized on the basis of geographic
     coverage, where mapping of one or more adjacent map sheets,ﬁles, or tiles is
     undertaken, completed, and distributed to users within aﬁxed period of time.
     Attention and budgets then shift to a different geographic area. It may be years

     or even decades before attention returns to agiven geographic area.(An exception
     is the United Kingdom, where revision cycles are much shorter.) When updating
     does occur on such maps or tiles, all features in the given area associated with
     that particular mapping product are typically updated unless otherwise speciﬁed.

  Contrast this list with Coote and Rackham’s proposed characteristics of neog   geophic
  information offered in Sect.  14.1. Further, Bruns( 2008 ) identi ﬁ es four important

  characteristics of information “produsage” in a W eb 2.0 environmentas distinctfrom
  more traditional information production:

  • Collection and review operations are community based rather than relying on
     “… a narrow elite of knowledge workers.”
  • Roles of produsers will be ﬂuid, alternating between collector, reviewer, arbitrator,
     and user at different times.
  • A given product will be never be ﬁnished—it will be under continuous review,

     and different aspects or portions will be updated at different times.
  • Produsers favor more permissive approaches to rights in intellectual property
     than those found in traditional content production.

     To employees within a mapping organization, then, the implications of inco   rartngo
  VGI into its processes include rethinking (1) entire aspects of production workﬂow,
  (2) who should be involved, and even (3) what constitutes a “product” they arepa  pred
  to offer to users. Important cultural hurdles may include the following:

  • Accepting that untrained “outsiders”—even trusted ones—may be willing and
     able to make reliable contributions
250                                                                   D.J. Coleman


• Assessing whether or not some larger community of users has the willingness
   and capability to collectively offer some level of editing and quality assessment
   of individual contributions
• Moving from a coverage-based to a feature-based updating model
• Accepting that such volunteered information will be “perpetually unﬁnished”

• Accounting for and balancing the respective rights of individual contributors, the
   VGI community, and the mapping organization itself
• Accommodating practical, political, social, and possibly even legal implications
   implicit in the characteristics mentioned above

   Allowing even trusted “outsiders” to collect and/or modify internally collected
mapping can be a difﬁcult culture shift. In Canada, it took at least 3 years in the late
1970s before internal government mapping inspectors agreed the quality of national
topographic series mapping compiled by professional private-sectorﬁrms was

sufﬁcient to shift contracting out from pilot-project efforts to standard practice.
Even exchanges of digital map data between different levels ofgovernmentmapping
agencies were undertaken with caution and only after considerable negotiation
(Pearson and Gareau 1986 ) .
   The cultural and processual changes involved in shifting the planning and
production focus from a “coverage-based” to a “feature-based” orientation cannot

be underestimated. Road-network ﬁrms like TomTom and NAVTEQ have already
made this shift and realized quicker turnaround times of updates and improved
customer service (TomTom 2008    ), but many government topographic mapping
organizations have not.



   14.3      Work ﬂ ow, Quality Assurance,

        and Risk Management Considerations

Despite the challenges mentioned in Sect.    14.2, the idea of using volunteered

geographic information nevertheless remains of considerable interest to mapping
organizations. The prospects of more descriptive and up-to-date information in
“high-usage” geographic areas where changes may occur frequently are attractive
to base-mapping organizations interested in exploring more cost-effective ways in
which to improve their products. This section describes some key considerations
mapping program managers should take into account when designing or reworking

production processes.



   14.3.1      Attracting and Retaining Volunteer Contributors


Will individuals want to contribute to government in the same way they contribute
to social networks and even to commercial databases from TomTom, NAVTEQ, and
others? What questions should an organization ask in determining how, if at all, it
14  Potential Contributions and Challenges of VGI for Conventional Topographic... 251


should employ VGI? How does an organization assess the credibility of a new
contributor and the degree of trust it can place in that person’s contributions? How
do organizations attract new volunteer contributors, and how do they keep existing
volunteers engaged—or is it assumed they will cycle in and out?

   There is ample evidence that interested volunteers do exist—at least in the early
stages of a program. Results of early research into the nature and motivation of
contributors—and the types of contributions they make—are discussed in depth by
Coleman et al. (2009 ) , Budhathoki et a2l0 . 0 ) , Dobson 201(0b), and Cooper et al.
 (2011) among others. Coleman et al. ( 2010) further examined how three different

spatial data organizations employed VGI in the updating of their map databases—
and summarized in each case the respective motivator(s) the program was directly
or indirectly offering.



   14.3.2       Quality Assurance Considerations


If and as volunteer contributions are solicited, how will they be integrated into
conventional production workﬂows? Given the challenges discussed in Sect. 14.2
of this chapter, how will quality assurance considerations be addressed? Who, if

anyone, will assume the risks associated with the introduction and use of contribu-
tions from different sources?
   As discussed in Sect.    14.2, there are fundamental differences between how
quality assurance is viewed by VGI contributors versus individuals in professional
mapping organizations. Conventional mapping is produced in accordance with mature,

well-documented speciﬁcations and is assessed by individuals who are trained in
interpreting those speciﬁcations and understanding the products themselves and well
versed in the inherent errors or blunders encountered in data compilation.
   The positional accuracy of volunteered geographic information in comparison
with data from conventional programs is well documented. Rigorous investigations

conducted by Haklay (2010 ) , Coleman et a2l.01(   0), and Girres and Touya (2010 ) ,
among others, all attest to the acceptability and accuracy of VGI contributions to
(e.g.) OpenStreetMap in relation to other well-documented map series. Moreover,
the repeated capture of the same feature’s location by multiple contributors through
active and (especially) passive means has proven to greatly improve the accuracy of
positioning and representation (Haklay et al. 2010; Dobson 2010a ) . Finally, related

research (e.g., Zandbergen2009; Gakstatter2010 ) has isolatc   ednstraints on existing
cell phones as positioning devices andled to technology breakthroughs that will
further improve cell phone-based positioning in the near future.
   Positional accuracy is only one aspect of data quality, though. Coote and Rackham
 (2008) point out that “quality” in the context of VGI is more subjective in nature and

depends on:
   1.   A user’s requirement and his or her expectations

   2.   The bene ﬁ ts the user wants to derive
   3.   What the user or contributor means by “data quality”
252                                                                      D.J. Coleman


In this regard, currency of data andreliability of feature attributes withina given area
may be far more important elements of quality to a given useror users thanpositional
accuracy or the completeness of coverage over an entire county or map tile.
   Also, in some VGI initiatives, there may be no clear line of authority regarding

who is ultimately responsible for assessing the quality of positioning and representa-
tion of a given feature, nor who possesses the rights to modify those things.
   This degree of subjectivity, the possible existence of multiple contexts, and ack
of clear lines of authority are possibly bafﬂing and certainly unacceptable to a practi-
tioner accustomed to conventional mapping workﬂow and practices.

   Finally, from a user perspective, the potential lack of consistency in terms of
up-to-date content, interpretation, and structuring may constrain a dataset’s use
for analysis and ultimately lead to only guarded acceptance of the product (Coote
and Rackham    2008 ) .



   14.3.3       Assessing the Credibility of Contributors


One of the major concerns of using VGI as a source of input to authoritative
databases is how to assess the credibility of contributors and the reliability of their

contributions. The success of reputation-based services like    eBay.com holds one
key for building trust for handling VGI. eBayusers who log in to purchase items
online may leave feedback for the sellers and future purchasers based on the success of
the transactions. eBay then uses a centralized user reputation system that drives its
inputs from buyer ratings of the sellers. Social networking sites which make use of

VGI contributions of point- and route-based data have adopted similar approaches
and, in some cases, automated the ways in which improvements can be noted and
incorporated.
   Different lessons can be learned from leading wikis such as        Wikipedia.org .
Wikipedia originally relied solely upon the “wisdom of the crowds” to evaluate,

assess, and if necessary, improve upon entries from individual contributors, usually
with great success. However, beginning in December 2009, it has relied on teams
of editors to adjudicate certain “ﬂagged entries” before deciding whether or not to
incorporate a volunteered revision (Beaumont 2009 ) .
   Theoretical approaches to characterizing VGI contributions and/or their con-
tributors are now being formulated by the international research community.

For example, Lenders et al.(    2008) theorize an automated approach to estab-
lishing the level of trust inherent in different user-generated contributions to
local-based services. The proposed architecture of their “secure localization and
certiﬁcation service” maintains user privacy by tagging volunteered content with
the location and time of the contribution rather than the identity of the contributor.

The level of trust in a given change increases in direct proportion to how recently
the contribution was made and how close the contributor was geographically to the
proposed change. Other examples of research to better categorize contributions
and automate processes include work by Maué and Schade(          2008 ) , Poser et al.
 (2009), and Brando et al. (2011 ) , among others.
14   Potential Contributions and Challenges of VGI for Conventional Topographic.253


   14.3.4       Practical Examples of Managing Risk


Coleman et al.(    2010)investigated how three different public and private
organizations incorporated volunteered contributions into their production workﬂow:
the state of Victoria’s Notiﬁcation for Edit Service in Australia, the National Map

Corps Initiative of the United States Geological Survey, and TomTom’s MapShare™
service. These are summarized in the following subsections.


   14.3.4.1    Noti ﬁ cation for Edit Service, Victoria Department
           of Sustainability and Environment, Australia

Victoria DSE’s Notiﬁcation for Edit Service (Thompson2011; NES2008 ) employs

internal contributions of volunteered geographicinformation by internal government
staff outside the formal mapping agencies to update widely used base-mapping
databases. A network of registered “knowledgeable notiﬁers”—state and local
government users of Victoria’s Corporate Spatial Data Library (CSDL)—use a
password-protected Web-based system to either correct or update selected mapped

features based on ﬁeld evidence found in routine government operations. Suggested
updates to a given feature are routed automatically to the designated custodian
agency responsible for that feature type, and then the custodian is given the option
to either conﬁrm or refute the amendment. An update tracking system provides
regular reports on the status of each update, where it currently sits in the process

and, if complete, whether or not it was accepted (Fig. 14.1 ).



   14.3.4.2    National Map Corps, United States Geological Survey

 The National Map Corps was a pioneering effort in using VGI to update and supple-
ment government mapping in North America. The NMC’s “Adopt-a-Map” program
had by 2001 over 3,000 volunteers identifying and annotating topographic map

corrections and updates to hardcopy United States Geological Survey (USGS) map
sheets (Fig. 14.2) and National Map data ﬁles (Bearden 2009). Later aspects of the
program included incorporation of updates and additions based on hand-held GPS
observations. Still later, a Web-based map and image viewer (Fig.     14.3 ) enabled
volunteer users to easily identify and label buildings and other structures requiring

annotation (Bearden 2007b ) .
   Although the volunteer response was very impressive, the USGS simply did not
possess the internal resources necessary to act on these notiﬁcations. Traditional
coverage-based map revision workﬂows and long updating cycles meant that the
feature-based annotation work completed by the volunteers was rarely used.

Volunteer numbers diminished, and the map annotation aspect of the program was
ultimately stopped altogether in 2005. Further, the large number of GPS updates
submitted overwhelmed the limited staff resources assigned to assessing and using
the volunteered input. By 2007, there was a 16-month backlog of GPS-collected

points increasing almost daily (Bearden2007a). Due to program budget cuts, issues
254                                                                        D.J. Coleman



































 Fig. 14.1Tracking updates within NES (NES 2008 )


































 Fig. 14.2Volunteered updates to hardcopy USGS mapping (Bearden 2007b )
14  Potential Contributions and Challenges of VGI for Conventional Topographic..255





























 Fig. 14.3National Map Corps image and map viewer (Bearden 2007b )


over continued resourcing, and internal disagreements over the validity of voleered
content, National Map Corps activities were suspended in fall 2008 with the exctipn

of its online viewer and labeler website (National Map Corps 2008 ) .
   Although the program itself had been suspended, interest remained strong in the
concept itself. A USGS-sponsored workshop on VGI was held in 2010 (CEGIS
2011), and a collaborative pilot project with the OpenStreetMap organization,

started in 2011 to have volunteers digitize new road information, is now under
evaluation (Wolf et al. 2011). A follow-on pilot project to collect data on thirty
different types of structures in the greater Denver, Colorado, area is now under way
(National Map Corps 2011 ) .




  14.3.4.3     TomTom’s MapShare™ Service

TomTom’s online MapShare™ service is a popular operational example of how one
large commercial data supplier manages risk in terms of assessing volunteered con-

tributions and disseminating such noncertiﬁed updates to its customers (Club
TomTom 2007). The company employs a graduated approach to sharing, assessing,
and using the volunteer-provided updates. First, MapShare contributors have the
choice of only using their updates on their own TomTom units, of sharing within

their own group, or of sharing them with the general TomTom community. Second,
256                                                                     D.J. Coleman
















 Fig. 14.4Customer choices in selecting MapShare updates to be used on own TomTom unit
(Club TomTom  2007 )


TomTom itself assigns a progressively higher level of credibility to a given
update through its independent conﬁrmation by (1) more than two independent
contributors, (2) many independent contributors, (3) a “trusted partner” or corporate

user, andﬁnally (4) its own crews or contractors in theﬁeld. Finally, it allows its
customers to interactively select the “level of trust” they desire for the data used on
their navigation unit (Fig. 14.4). Customers may elect to use only updates reported
by TomTom/Tele Atlas ﬁeld crews, by trusted commercial partners and many cus-
tomers, by only a few customers, or even only by themselves.

    Chapter 17by Dobson in this volume offers a much more detailed description of
TomTom’s MapShare service and the data collection  production work ﬂ ow itemploys.
As well, it provides valuable comparisons with TomTom’s competitor NAVTEQ
and with the hybrid approach to collection and updating adopted by Google.




   14.4      Discussion


Coleman et al.( 2009)suggested important questions that conventional public
and priv ate mapping organizations should ask themselves when considering the
opportunities and risks posed by introducing and emplo ying VGI intheir production
processes. What problems or objectives are we trying to address? To what extent

should we initially adopt VGI? How may credible contributors be distinguished
from those who are mischievous or malicious? How do we cultivate the volunteers—
whether they are one-time or regular contributors? Who makes the ﬁnal decisions
regarding the reliability and integrity of a given update?
   These are legitimate questions, and early lessons can already be drawn from review-

ing these volunteered contributions as well as those to other online communities.

   Regarding the Programs Themselves
• Experience has shown that, once the request goes out, the number and extent of
   volunteered contributions can be signiﬁcantly underestimated. Organizationsthat
14  Potential Contributions and Challenges of VGI for Conventional Topographic.257


   underresourced the VGI acceptance and veriﬁcation aspects of their production
   workﬂows have found themselves overwhelmed and unable to use all the input.
   Unless the rationale and goals of a VGI initiative—be it pilot project or main-

   stream activity—are clearly deﬁned, communicated, and measured, the initiative
   risks being curtailed when the next round ofbudget cuts occur. Programmanagers
   need to be clear on their rationale, their goals, and the metrics used to assess
   progress towards those goals. “Shortening updating cycles,” “verifying selected
   attributes,” and “adding new attributes” for speciﬁc features are all examples of

   legitimate and measurable goals.
    Regarding Contributors

• The size and scope of the “contributor pool” may be controlled. Initially, it may
   be restricted to employees of the organization and knowledgeable, long-standing
   users of the data. Access may be opened up gradually as conﬁdence grows in the
   contributions received and as the organization provides additional resources to
   accept and process the growing number of contributions.

• Volunteer contributors value some recognition of their contribution. This may
   range from prompt recognition of the contribution by a return e-mail message
   (Tele Atlas and Google both acknowledge such contributions to their Map Insight
   and My Map websites) to more formal inclusion of contributors in metadata or
   tags associated with the feature.

• Contributors want to see their contribution used—and quickly. Case studies cited
   from both the Wikipedia and the open-source software communities identiﬁed
   the importance of contributions being acted upon and either incorporated or
   refuted quickly. The falloff of National Map Corps volunteers after their updates

   were not acted upon quickly is just one example of this. It may take a while to
   verify a contribution, but early acknowledgement of its receipt and follow-on
   communication that it is being reviewed are both signs of good service that con-
   tributors value.
• As a program matures, failing to retainall volunteer contributorsis notnecessarily

   a sign of failure. Experience has shown that the majority of contributors of new
   information to such databases may make only one or two contributions—a new
   road, an update or correction to a given feature in their neighborhood, etc.
   A limited group of dedicated and long-serving members of the volunteer cmomnity
   then assess that contribution and reﬁne it to fully meet existing speciﬁcations.

• This, in turn, implies that mature programs must have separate but integrated
   interfaces. A simple, easy-to-use interface with limited functionality—but erps
   more extensive postprocessing—is required to satisfy occasional or one-time-
   only contributors. With an appropriate hierarchy of access privileges in place, a
   more sophisticated and multifunctional Web interface would be employed to

   accommodate more extensive edits by internal production staff and external
   “power users.”

    Regarding Their Contributions
• The majority of contributions—especially to road networks—deal with amm    eents
   or additions to a feature’s attributes rather than to its location or representation.
258                                                                     D.J. Coleman


• Major private-sector initiatives like TomTom’s have already recognized that they
   must develop hybrid systems that accommodate different channels of volutneered
   input. Following the examples discussed in this chapter, a conventional mapping
   organization may start by accepting only amendments to attribute data and active

   contributions of positional data collected using GPS. They may subsequently
   add the capability to incorporate active contributions of features digitized from
   online satellite or aerial imagery. As technologies and attitudes evolve, their
   system may grow to include approved passivecontributions of aperson’sposition
   in real time as he or she travels in a car or ATV, on a bicycle, or even on foot.

•   Thereare established and tested ways to validate the reliability of VGI contonsib
   and the credibility of their contributors. Certain spatial and temporal coateirons
   make VGI contributions unique, and these may be used to support or refute
   the credibility of a given contributor. Tools built atop early technologies like
   WikiScanner (Borland    2007)may help identify the rough geographic location
   from which a contribution originated. Geotagged cell phone images may be used

   to provide supporting evidence of a given update.
      Some VGI activities—for example, digitizing features from satellite imagery
   in areas with limited vector mapping or where a natural disaster has occurred—
   may not lend themselves to this type of validation. However, this is where

   engagement of other volunteers helps to validate or refute a contribution, or assess
   the reliabilityof competing or contradictory contributions.



   14.5      On the Future of Conventional Public-Sector
        Mapping Programs


The signiﬁcant growth and notoriety of private-sectormapping services and their
more rapid adoption of VGI beg questions as to the future ofpublic- sector mapping
programs. Certainly government budgets are shrinking. Funding for both in-house
and subcontract production has declined insome jurisdictions. Where new orupdated
production is under way in national- and state-level programs, funds are more likely

to be directed towards creation of image-based mapping products and higher-accuracy
digital elevation models rather than towards updates to vector mapping.
   Moreover, rather than compete, many governments have opted to provide a base
upon whichothers can develop and provide value-added applications. Even in cases
where the basic road centerline and cultural informatiomay come from government

base mapping, that information is now perceived to have originated from the Web
service provider itself. This places program executives in the position of having to
explain to their public-service and political masters the reasons why they should
continue to be funded at all.
   Why indeed? While they may form the vast majority of operations conducted,

can we assume that allusers will be satisﬁed solely by the map display, address-
ﬁnding, routing, area-based query, and point-mapping capabilities of services like
Google and Bing?
  14  Potential Contributions and Challenges of VGI for Conventional Topographic...259


    The largest and most intensive groups of users of multipurpose government
  mapping are usually found in other government departments. Clearly, a full investi-
  gation of this larger question is beyond the scope of this chapter. However, thefoionlg
  focused questions would help drive such an investigation:

    1.   By virtue of its mission, teoxtewnhtt ust a government orprivate organization
     commit to certain norms or expectations of areal coverage and consistency of

     reliability or currency of a geospatial dataset in a given jurisdiction? Have such
     expectations become negotiable?
  2. What assumptions are taken into account when using conventional base mapping
     for speciﬁc applications? What operations (if any) must be undertaken to convert
     or prepare this conventional mapping for use in internal applications?

 3.Under what conditions can geospatial data provided by commercial suppliers
     like Google, Bing (Microsoft), and others be used by organizations to meet their
     own unique mission-driven requirements? (The act of “importing” per se may be a
     misnomer in this era of cloud computing.) What are the legal, ﬁnancial, techno-
     logical, and labor implications involved?
4.To what extent do the geospatial data content, coverage, accuracy, attribute

     correctness, currency, and structure of commercial datasets meet the require-
     ments of speciﬁc applications to be found in such customer organizations? Does
     the potential heterogeneity of such data across a jurisdiction represent a concern?
     Under what circumstances?
  5. Under what conditions are commercial providers prepared to upgrade the quality

     or consistency of their data to meet the needs of speciﬁc customers? Are these
     upgrades subsequently available to all users and under what conditions?
6.To what extent are user organizations now prepared either to independently
     update such commercial information, to update their own datasets, or even to
     collect and use their own geospatial data from scratch in their GIS applications

     as a project requires?
 7.To what extent is a government organization prepared to tie itself and its data
     holdings to any one particular service provider? What conditions and provisions
     should be considered by that organization in order to protect its investment in its
     own data holdings?

  Responses to these and other questions should have a real bearing on the nature of
  enabling infrastructure, products, and services provided by public-sector mapping
  programs in the future.




     14.6      Concluding Remarks

  This chapter has introduced the context and characteristics implicit in conventional
  digital topographic mapping programs and contrasts them to important underlying

  assumptions regarding volunteered geographic information. Despite claims to the
  contrary, government topographic mapping products in most countries are not
 260                                                                            D.J. Coleman


 “authoritative” by any practical deﬁnition. Far from it. They are typically out of date,
 possibly inconsistent, and usually the victims of diminishing maintenance budgets.

    At the same time, claims that VGI in itself—or VGI-supported private data
 suppliers—will replace the overall role of conventional mapping organizations in

 developed countries in the near term are likely overblown. Research has demon-
 strated that there remain remote areas in which change may have occurred but which
 are not being mapped by volunteers. As well, further research is required to dem       teirne

 the conditions under which such suppliers would have the interest and resources
 required to satisfy the varied requirements of such conventional programs.
    VGI is not the ultimate solution to all geospatial data updating and maintenance

 challenges now faced by mapping organizations. However, there is growing agm           reent
 that it representsone important channelof such updates—one that needs to be inves-

 tigated, prototyped, and introduced in a reasonable, informed manner.

  Acknowledgments The author would like to recognize the Earth Sciences Sector of Natural

 Resources Canada, the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC),
 and the GEOIDE Network of Centres of Excellence for their ﬁnancial support of this research over
 the past 3 years. As well, he would like to thank UNB graduate students Krista Amolins, Andriy
 Rak, and Titus Tienaah for their constructive suggestions during the review of this chapter.




   References


  Andrews, G. (1970A  ).dministration of surveys and mapping in Canada, 1968 . Report of the
    National Advisory Committee on Control Surveys and Mapping to the Surveys and Mapping
    Branch, Dept. of Energy, Mines and Resources Canada, Ottawa, Canada.

 Ball, M. (2010). What’s thedistinction between crowdsourcinolunteered geographicinformation,
    and authoritative data? Editorial in  v1 Magazine .   http://www.vector1media.com/dialog/
    perspectives/16068-whats-the-distinction-between-crowdsourcing-volunteered-geographic-
    information-and-authoritative-data.html Accessed 1 Aug 2011.
Bearden, M. J. (2007a, Dec 13–14).   The national map corps . Paper presented at workshop on
    volunteered geographic information, University of California at Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara,

    CA.   http://www.ncgia.ucsb.edu/projects/vgi/docs/position/Bearden_paper.pd.fAccessed 10
    Feb 2009.
Bearden, M. J. (2007b, Dec 13–14).   The national map corps . Presentation from workshop on
    volunteered geographic information, University of California at Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara,
    CA.    http://www.ncgia.ucsb.edu/projects/vgi/docs/present/Bearden_USGS_MapCorps19.pdf.
    Accessed 10 Feb 2009.
Bearden, M. J. (2009). Personal communication with national map corps program coordinator,

    U.S. Geological Survey National Geospatial Technical Operations Center, Rolla, Missouri,
    USA, 21 April.
Beaumont, C. (2009, Aug 26). Wikipedia ends unrestricted editing of articles.  The Telegraph.
     http://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/wikipedia/6088833/Wikipedia-endsunrestricted-
    editing-of-articles.htmlAccessed 11 Aug 2011.
 Borland, J. (2007). See who’s editing Wikipedia—Diebold, the CIA, a Campaign. Politics/Online

    Rights Blog. Wired.   http://www.wired.com/politics/onlinerights/news/2007/08/wiki_tracker.
    Accessed 14 Jan 2012.
 Brando, C., Bucher, B., & Abadie, N. (2011). Speciﬁcations for user generated spatial content.
    In S. Geertman, W. Reinhardt, & F. Toppen (Eds.), Advancing geoinformation science for a
    changing world (pp. 479–495). New York: Springer.
  14   Potential Contributions and Challenges of VGI for Conventional Topographic...            261


    Bruns, A. (2008B  ).logs, Wikipedia, second life, and beyond: From production to produsage      .

     New York: Peter Lang.
  Budhathoki, N., Nedovic-Budic, Z., & Bruce, B. (2010). An interdisciplinary frame for un stdaenrding
     volunteered geographic information. Geomatica, 64 (1), 11–26.
  Casey, M. (2009, May)C . itizen mapping and charting: How crowdsourcing is helping to revo tilounize

     mapping & charting. Proceedings of the 2009 U.S. Hydrographic Conference, Norfolk, VA.
      http://www.thsoa.org/hy09/0512A_02.pdf. Accessed 15 Aug 2011.
    CEGIS. (2011)U  . .S. Geological Survey volunteered geographic information workshop      . http://
     cegis.usgs.gov/vgi/index.html . Accessed 30 June 2011.

    Club TomTom. (2007)G    . et to know MapShare™. The ofﬁcial blog for TomTom in North
     America .   http://www.clubtomtom.com/general/get-to-know-tomtom-mapshare™/. Accessed
     15 Apr 2009.
  Coleman, D. J., Georgiadou, Y., & Labonte, J. (2009). Volunteered geographic information: The

     nature and motivation of producers.    International Journal of Spatial Data Infrastructures
     Research,4, 332–358.   http://ijsdir.jrc.ec.europa.eu/index.php/ijsdir/article/view/1408ccessed
     14 Jan 2012.
 Coleman, D. J., Sabone, B., & Nkhwanana, N. (2010). Volunteering geographic information to

     authoritative databases: Linking contributor motivations to program effectiveness. Geomatica,
     64 (1), 383–396.
  Cook, S. (2008, Oct). Why contributors contributeH.arvard Business Review.  http://usercontrition.
     intuit.com/The+Contribution+Revolution+linked+version     . Accessed 3 Aug 2011.

  Cooper, A., Coetzee, S., Kaczmarek, I., Kourie, D., Iwaniak, A., & Kubik, T. (2011, May 31–Ju2n)e.
     Challenges for quality in volunteered geographical information. Proceedings of the AfricaGEO
     2011 Conference, Cape Town, South Africa.            http://researchspace.csir.co.za/dspace/han-
     dle/10204/5057  . Accessed 20 Aug 2010.

  Coote, A., & Rackham, L. (2008, Sept).Neogeographic data quality—Is it an issue?Paper delivered
     at the 2008 AGI Geocommunity Conference 2008, ConsultingWhere Ltd            . , Stratford-upon-
     Avon, UK.
  Cowen, D. et al. (2003). Weaving a national map: Review of the U.S. Geological Survey concept

     of the national map. Report of the National Research Council (U.S.). Committee to Review the
     U.S. Geological Survey Concept of the National Map. Washington, DC: National Academies
     Press.
 Dobson, M. (2010a, Aug 29). TomTom, TeleAtlas and MapShare . Telemapics Blog .          http://blog.

     telemapics.com/?p=323   . Accessed 2 Aug 2010.
  Dobson, M. (2010b, Sept 22). Crowdsourcing—How much is too much? Telemapics Blog .           http://
     blog.telemapics.com/?p=328   . Accessed 2 Aug 2010.
 Fisheries and Oceans Canada. (2011). About CHS: What we do.          http://www.charts.gc.ca/about-

     apropos/wwd-qfn-eng.asp    . Accessed 30 Aug 2011.
  Gakstatter, E. (2010, June 1). The dawn of a new era in GPS accura Gcy.S World Column. http://www.
     gpsworld.com/gis/gss-weekly/the-dawn-a-new-era-gps-accuracy-10016    . Accessed 3 June 2010.
Girres, J.-F., & Touya, G. (2010). Quality assessment of the French OpenStreetMap dataset.

     Transactions in GIS, 14 (4), 435–459.
  Goodchild, M. F. (2007). Citizens as voluntary sensors: Spatial data infrastructure in the world of
     Web 2.0.International Journal of Spatial Data Infrastructures Research, 2,24–32.    http://ijsdir.
     jrc.ec.europa.eu/index.php/ijsdir/article/view/28/22. Accessed 25 Aug 2011.

Goodchild, M. F. (2009). NeoGeography and the nature of geographic expertise.            Journal of
     Location Based Services, 3 (2), 82–96.
 Google. (2011). Countries editable in Google map maker.         http://www.google.com/mapmaker/
     map ﬁ les/s/launched.html . Accessed 10 Aug 2011.

  Grira, J., Bédard, Y., & Roche, S. (2010). Spatial data uncertainty in the VGI world: Going from
     consumer to producer. Geomatica, 64 (1), 61–71.
  Guélat, J-C. (2009, Aug).Integration of user generated content into national databases—Revision
     work ﬂ ow at Swisstop . 1st EuroSDR Workshop on CrowdsourcingF     ,ederal Of ﬁ cef Topography
     swisstopo, Wabern, Switzerland.     http://www.eurosdr.net/workshops/crowdsourcing_2009/

     presentations/c-4.pdf . Accessed 8 Dec 2011.
  262                                                                                D.J. Coleman


 Haklay, M. (2010). How good is volunteered geographical information? A comparative study of

     OpenStreetMap and ordnance survey datasets. Environment and Planning B: Planning and
     Design, 37 (4), 682–703.
  Haklay, M., Basiouka, S., Antoniou, V., & Ather, A. (2010). How many volunteers does it take
     to map an area well? The validity of Linus’ law to volunteered geographic information.

     The Cartographic Journal, 47 (4), 315–322.
 Hardy, G. A., & Johnston, W. F. (1982). The future of the ordnance survey?     The Geographical
     Journal, 148 (2), 155–172.
 Heinzelman, J., & Waters, C. (2010). Crowdsourcing crisis information in disaster-affected Haiti

     (Special Report 252). Washington, DC: United States Institute of Peace.      http://www.usip.
     org/ ﬁ les/resources/SR252%20-%20Crowdsourcing%20Crisis%20Information%20in%20
     Disaster-Affected%20Haiti.pdf  . Accessed 15 Aug 2011.
  Heipke, C. (2010). Crowdsourcing geospatial data.ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote

     Sensing, 65 (6), 550–557.
 Kadaster International. (2007, Sept). Abroad. Special issue on how e-government and land infor-
     mation align. Periodical newsletter of Kadaster International    . http://www.kadaster.nl/pdf/
     abroad_092007.pdf  . Accessed 25 July 2011.

  Lenders, V., Koukoumidis, E., Zhang, P., & Martonosi, M. (2008). Location-based trust for mobile
     user-generated content: Applications, challenges and implementations. In Proceedings of the
     9th workshop on mobile computing systems and applications (pp. 60–64). New York: ACM.
 LINZ. (2011). About notices to mariners. Land information New Zealand.       http://www.linz.govt.

     nz/hydro/ntms/about-ntms  . Accessed 20 Aug 2011.
  Maué, P., & Schade, S. (2008, May). Quality of geographic information patchworks . Proceedings
     of the 11th AGILE International Conference on Geographic Information Science, Girona,
     Spain.  http://plone.itc.nl/agile_old/Conference/2008-Girona/PDF/111_DOC.pdf. Accessed 30

     May 2009.
  National Map Corps. (2008). Important notice concerning national map corps.   http://nationalmap.
     gov/tnm_corps.html  . Accessed 29 May 2009.
National Map Corps. (2011). The national map corps pilot projects.          http://nationalmap.gov/

     TheNationalMapCorps/pilot.html   . Accessed 20 Aug 2011.
 NES. (2008). NES help module 3 change request/easy editor, p. 31.     http://www.land.vic.gov.au/
     CA256F310024B628/0/DA7C602F526419D8CA25750D00053B7B/$File/
     NES+Quick+Module3.pdf     . Accessed 29 July 2011.

  Obloy, E. J., & Sharetts-Sullivan, B. H. (1994, Oc).xploitation of intellectual property by trnic
     chartmakers: Liability, retrenchment and a proposal for change. Proceedings of the conference
     on law and information policy for spatial databases, Tempe, AZ.     http://www.spatial.maine.
     edu/~onsrud/tempe/obloy.html  . Accessed 20 Aug 2011.

   OECD. (2007)P.articipative web: User-created content: Web 2.0, wikis and social networking .
     Report of the Working Party onthe Information Economy,Committee forInformation,Computer
     and Communications Policy, Directorate for Science, Technology and Industry, Organization
     for Economic Co-Operation And Development. 12 April. Paris: OECD Publishing. ISBN

     9264037462, 9789264037465.
 Pearson, M., & Gareau, R. (1986). Exchanging digital base mapping data. In Proceedings of the
     second international symposium on spatial data handling      (pp. 611–615). Williamsville:
     International Geographical Union.

  Poser, K., Kreibich, H., & Dransch, D. (2009). Assessing volunteered geographic information for
     rapid ﬂood damage estimation . Proceedings of the 12th AGILE International Conference on
     Geographic Information Science, Leibniz Universität, Hannover, Germany, pp. 1–9.
 Roche, S., Propeck-Zimmermann, E., & Mericskay, B. (2011). GeoWeb and crisis management:

     Issues and perspectives of volunteered geographic information.     GeoJournal . doi: 10.1007/
     s10708-011-9423-9   .
Thompson, Y. (2011, July 20). Notiﬁcation for edit service (NES).        Mygeoplace Blog .   http://
     mygeoplace.com/2011/07/30/noti ﬁ cation-for-edit-service-nes/ . Accessed 10 Aug 2011.
14   Potential Contributions and Challenges of VGI for Conventional Topographic...           263


 TomTom. (2008, Dec 16). TomTom announces ﬁve millionth map share™ improvement.TomTom

    News.  http://www.tomtom.com/news/category.php?ID=4&NID=660&Lid=.4         Accessed 1 May
    2009.
Turner, A. (2007, Dec 6). Neogeography—Towards a deﬁnition. A weblog posted on High Earth
    Orbit .http://highearthorbit.com/neogeography-towards-a-de ﬁ nition ./Accessed 15 Aug 2011.

 UNECA. (1966, Sept 12–24).Maintaining current base information for aeronautical charts. Paper
    submitted by the United States Government to the 2nd United Nationals Cartographic
    Conference for Africa, Tunis, Tunisia. United Nations Economic and Social Council.      http://
    repository.uneca.org/bitstream/handle/123456789/15884/Bib-64431.pdf?sequence=1               .

    Accessed 25 Aug 2011.
 Van der Molen, P., & Wubbe, M. (2007).E-government and E-land administration. As an example:
    The Netherlands. Proceedings of the 6th Regional FIG Conference ‘Coastal Areas and Land
    Administration—Building the Capacity’, San Jose, Costa Rica.http://www. ﬁ g.net/pub/cositcaar_1/

    papers/ts10/ts10_02_wubbe_vandermolen_2480.pdf      . Accessed 15 Aug 2011.
 van der Vlugt, M. (2011, Jan 4).SMA, sensis or OpenStreetMap: Whatmakes spatialdata“authori-
    tative”? Spatial Information in the 21st Century Blog. http://spatial21.blogspot.com/2011/01/
    psma-sensis-or-openstreetmap-what-makes.html    . Accessed 1 Aug 2011.

Wolf, E. B., Matthews, K. M., & Poore, B. S. (2011, June).OpenStreetMap collaborative proto type,
    phase one. Open-ﬁle report 2011–1136.      http://pubs.usgs.gov/of/2011/1136/pdf/OF11–1136.
    pdf. Accessed 31 Aug 2011.
Zandbergen, P. A. (2009). Accuracy of iPhone locations: A comparison of assisted GPS, WiFi

    and cellular positioning. Transactions in GIS, 13 (1), 5–26.
 Zook, M., Graham, M., Shelton, T., & Gorman, S. (2010). Volunteered geographic information and
    crowdsourcing disaster relief: A case study of the Haitian earthquake.World Medical & Health
    Policy, 2 (2), 7–33.
   Chapter 15

“We Know Who You Are and We Know

Where You Live”: A Research Agenda

for Web Demographics


    T. Edwin Chow







 AbstractIn the digital era, personal data, such as full name, address, age, phone
number, and household members, may scatter across various administrative records,

databases of private companies, and social networks, as well as through information
contributed as volunteered geographic information (VGI). People-ﬁnder sites gather
such data and provide user interfaces for Internet users to query web demographics.
The emergence of web technologies such as mash-ups, web mapping, and webscraping

presents opportunities to capitalize on the availability of web demographics and opens
up new frontiers of research. The main objectives of this chapter are to (1) examine
web demographics as an example of VGI and (2) explore the research agenda of web
demographics. More research and development are needed to enhance extraction
rules, identify and remove erroneous enumeration (e.g., duplicate, ﬁctitious, and

incomplete records), validate the coverage and accuracy of web demographics, and
explore potential applications. Web demographics must be used cautiously in light
of the uncertainty of web demographics (e.g., digital divide), privacy issues, and
other societal impacts.












This title is partially adapted from Goss (1995) as a tribute to his early vision of “data merchants”
acquiring massive personal demographic data and the instrumentation prospects and potential for
resistance to geodemographic marketing systems.
  T. E. C*o)  (
  Texas Center for Geographic Information Science, of Geography,
Texas State University – San Marcos , San Marcos, TX 78666 , USA
e-mail: chow@txstate.edu


D. Sui et al. (eds.), Crowdsourcing Geographic Knowledge: Volunteered Geographic
Information (VGI) in Theory and Practice, DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-4587-2_15,
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
266                                                                        T.E. Chow


     15.1       Introduction


The mission of a census is to determine where people live and their demographic
attributes at a speciﬁc time. The effort to achieve this goal at the national level is
no small task. Common enumeration strategies include mailings, phone calls, and
personal interviews. These conventional enumeration instruments, however, remain

labor intensive, time-consuming, and costly. The US Government Accountability
Ofﬁce estimated the cost of Census 2010 to be between $13.7 billion and $14.5   libil,
doubling the $6.5 billion expense of Census 2000 and four times the cost of Census
1990 (US GAO     2001, 2008 ) .
   In addition to these challenges, the low response rate and other complicating
factors (e.g., mobile population and illegal migrants) result in misrepresentation of

some population groups (Anderson and Fienberg 1999). The US Census Bureau
assessed the accuracy of Census 2000 population count and estimated the error
to be between −0.48% and 0.12% (an underestimation of 1.3 million people to an
overestimation of 0.34 million people, respectively) (Anderson and Fienberg 2002 ;
Robinson and Adlakha 2002). These results suggest that the task to accurately enu-

merate every person, especially ethnic minorities, females, and/or people younger
than 18, remains problematic (Robinson and Adlakha 2002 ) .
   Aside from ofﬁcial censuses, in the digital era, personal data such as full name,
address, age, phone number, etc. may scatter across various administrative records,
databases of private companies, and social networks, as well as through information

contributed as volunteered geographic information (VGI). Compiling such valuable
information into a demographic database is useful not only for marketing but also
for urban planning, resource allocation, disaster response,nd various social studies.
   Moving forward from the conventional web architecture in which a multiplicity
of one-way transactions between client and server take place, Web 2.0 represents a
collection of services that enable bidirectional communication for dynamic content

delivery. By proliferating the interconnectivity and interactivity of web content
across the Internet, Web 2.0 empowers smart applications to access the distributed
databases and transform Internet users from web content consumers to web content
producers. For example, a people-ﬁnder site (a phone-book equivalent) gathers
demographic data from multiple sources and provides an interface for Internet users

to query web demographics online. As the Internet connects these remote demo-
graphic databases onto a common platform, it redeﬁnes the societal implications
that Goss (1995) discussed earlier: the prevalence of electronic surveillance, aneion
of privacy, as well as the discourse of geodemographic analysis. The emergence of
web technologies such as mash-up, web mapping, and web scraping opens up new

frontiers of research (Chow 2008, 2011). The main objectives of this chapter are to
1. Examine web demographics as an example of VGI (Sect. 15.2 )

2. Explore the research agenda of web demographics for monitoring and modeling
   population dynamics (Sect. 15.3 )

The sections below are organized in the sameorder as the objectiveslisted aboveand
are followed by a concluding remark at the chapter’s end.
15  “We Know Who You Are and We Know Where You Live”: A Research...              267


   15.2      Web Demographics as VGI?


Demographic data have been stored, maintained, and updated by various public and
private institutions. In general, these databases are scattered across geographic

spaces and disconnected from each other. People-ﬁnder sites such as Zabasearch
(www.zabasearch.com) compile these diverse sources of demographics into a
centralized repository and make the web demographics searchable on the Internet.
In addition to the conventional databases, some web demographics also include
information solicited from social networking websites such as Facebook (      www.

facebook.com) and Myspace ( www.myspace.com). Moreover, some demographic
data providers allow users to update their own but also others’ listings.
   Given its origin, web demographics may seem to be different from “typical” VGI
in which individuals volunteer their spatially referenced observations through

active participation on a speciﬁc project, such as the OpenStreetMap ( www.open-
streetmap.org) and Wikimapia ( www.wikimapia.org      ). However, similar to VGI,
web demographics are generated from multiple data sources and are enabled by
the advancement of the Web 2.0 phenomenon. In order to label web demographics
either as VGI or merely a gigantic demographic database available on the web, it is

perhaps useful to distinguish the VGI communityfrom traditional mappingagencies
(Goodchild 2007 ) :

   [t]he world of VGI is chaotic, with little in the way of formal structures. Information is
   constantly being created and cross-referenced, and ﬂows in all directions, since producers
   and consumers are no longer distinguishable. Timescales are enormously compressed…
   tens of thousands of citizens are willing to spend large amounts of time cothutbuting, wio
   any hope of ﬁnancial reward, and often without any assurance that anyone will ever make
   use of their contributions. (p. 29)
   According to Goodchild’s ( 2007) framework, web demographics resemble and

differ from VGI in the following ways:

• Chaotic structures: While a valid record of web demographics must include a
   name, other demographic data (e.g., address, phone number)do not havea formal
   structure or clear deﬁnition. Names can be composed of ﬁrst and family names
   that are spelled out in full or initialized. Addresses can range from full address
   at the street level to a city location. Some people-ﬁnder sites include relatives

   or associated members (e.g., roommates). There are no metadata about the
   producer, timestamp, accuracy, and coverage with regard to any of the ﬁelds in
   web demographics.
• Instant and cross-referenced information : As web demographics are typically

   integrated from multiple sources, most records, if not all, have multiple contribu-
   tors and are cross-referenced instantaneously. For example, it is common for an
   individual record in web demographics to have hyperlinks connected to services
   such as credit reports and genealogy. Interestingly, some people-ﬁnder sites share
   the same databases with other websites. The WhitePages (www.whitepages.com)

   database empowers Switchboard (      www.switchboard.com), MSNWhitePages
   ( msn.whitepages.com), 411 ( www.411.com), and Address ( www.address.com).
268                                                                         T.E. Chow


   Similarly, Addresses ( www.addresses.com) also shares the same database with
   AnyWho ( www.anywho.com) and People Finder ( www.people ﬁ nder.com          ).
• Ambiguous roles of contributor  : The producers of web demographics are argu   ably

   the public and private sectors who acquire the personal demographic data.
   The people-ﬁnder sites acquire the data from multiple sources and often sell the
   compiled records as value-added products for marketing purposes. It is not
   uncommon that the consumers of such web demographics are the producers.
   Some people-ﬁnder sites allow Internet users, who may be subjects of the web

   demographics themselves, to update the listing or disable it from being searched
   (i.e., opt-out). It is not exactly clear which party is the sole contributor or who
   “owns” the right to these records.
• Compressed timescales : It is not known how quickly the web demographics
   can be acquired, compiled, and consolidated from conventional data sources.

   Theoretically, web demographics can be created and updated instantaneously
   in near real time. Preliminaryﬁndings and reasonable estimation suggest
   that the timescale ranges from weeks to months and possibly to years (Chow
   et al.2010). Nevertheless, web demographics can be gathered and updated at a
   much shorter and ﬂexible timescale than conventional enumeration strategies,

   such as the labor-intensive mail, telephone, or face-to-face surveys involved in a
   population census.
• Motivation of volunteers: In web demographics, the primary method of contrib-
   uting VGI is submitting/editing a personal proﬁle in the people-ﬁnder sites.
   The subjects of web demographics might not actively surrender their personal

   information due to information privacy, disclosure rights, and other related
   issues. However, positive and negative motivations common to the production
   of VGI might affect the quality of web demographics (Coleman et al.         2009 ) .
   For example, positive motivations (e.g., professional or personal interest, pride

   of place) might drive users to correct and update the personal proﬁles, whereas
   negative motivators (e.g., privacy concerns) might cause users to “opt-out” or
   tolerate errors in web demographics. In addition to voluntary input, people-ﬁnder
   sites also solicit web demographics from social networking sites in which indi-
   viduals willingly allow their personal informationto be searchableby friendsand

   acquaintances. Thus, the network of web demographics producers consists of
   a network of citizen sensors, as well as a centralized hierarchy of many web
   crawlers over dozens of public/private contributors who are connected to num   ours
   unaware, “volunteering” citizens.

   Whether or not web demographics are an example of VGI, a critical but unre-
solved question is how volunteerism should be deﬁned and interpreted. The key
distinction central to this dialogue is “whether the volunteers have actually volun-

teered the information or whether it is being volunteered largely unbeknownst
to them” (Tulloch   2008). The former group of volunteers is a classic example of
VGI contributors who understand the call of a particular VGI application and make
active contributions to achieve thatgoal by crowdsourcing. Inreality, theparticipants
15  “We Know Who You Are and We Know Where You Live”: A Research...             269


of VGI often have varying degrees of understanding about the stated goal(s) and
little consensus, if any, about the procedures to be used to review and utilize VGI.
On the other hand, the VGI production from the latter group of volunteers can be

perceived as passive contribution in that their GI was acquired unknowingly. The
nature of passive acquisition may be similar to the collection of GI through GPS-
enabled mobile devices – a phenomenon referred as geoslavery (Dobson and
Fisher 2003; Tulloch 2008). Therefore, web demographics can be perceived as
VGI collected by using a mixed mode of active contribution and passive acquisition.

It would be interesting to examine how various channels of VGI contribution can
affect the quality, for better or worse, of web demographics.
   From these perspectives, web demographics have elements that are common
but different from “conventional” VGI. Using the OpenStreetMap (OSM) project
as an analogy, any voluntary submission of personal proﬁle information in web

demographics is an active contribution of VGI similar to the volunteered editing
of geographic features in OSM. Howevert,he evolving databaseof webdemographics
is constantly being compiled and updated by the passive acquisition of information
from unaware individuals, as opposed to the raw TIGER ﬁle used as a “baseline”
database in OSM, where there is no channel of passive acquisition. As such, it is

perhaps more accurate to describe web demographics as VGI in which individuals
volunteer both directly and indirectly through third party data suppliers without
full realization.
   The multifaceted nature and taxonomy of VGI has yet to be fully explored and
acknowledged. After the term, VGI was coined by Goodchild( 2007 ) , a surge of

research followed,ﬁrst appearing in published outlets in 2007. Similar to VGI,
web demographics have great potential for geospatial application and share similar
challenges, such as the digital divide and privacy issues (Elwood and Leszczynski
2011). Thus, it is appropriate to perceive web demographics as a special type of

VGI and to examine the research agenda of web demographics within the larger
umbrella of VGI research.




   15.3      Research Agenda of Web Demographics


As the research of web demographics is still in its infancy, there is a great need to
understand the nature of web demographics as an alternative data source, discover
its potential applications, examine conceivable shortcomings, and explore possible
solutions to those shortcomings. Studies in recent years highlight the development
of a web-based demographic data extraction tool and offer preliminary comparisons

between the web demographics and census enumeration of Vietnamese-Americans
in Texas (Chow et al. 2010, 2011). This section explores the procedure of utilizing
web demographics for population monitoring, including acquisition, processing,
applications, validation, privacy, and other related issues.
270                                                                         T.E. Chow


   15.3.1       Acquisition


 The acquisition of web demographics is typically conducted by web scraping – the
act of extracting (or “scraping off”) the demographic content from an existing
website at a ﬁxed temporal interval. A web-scraping program consists of a web
crawler that can identify targeted content and a web wrapper that extracts the

data of interest in speciﬁc formats. The basic idea is to parse the HyperText
Markup Language (HTML) document and analyze the hierarchical tags embedded
within the content structured in various degrees. Chow et al.(     2011 ) outlined a
ﬁve-step framework to automate the extraction of web demographics based on
surname analysis. The process can be extended from a predeﬁned HTML schema
to statistical clustering, machine-learning algorithms, data-mining techniques, or

ontology-based relationships to better reﬁne the extraction and navigation rules
(Chang et al. 2006 ) .
   To improve population monitoring, researchers should also investigate the use
of the semantic web, an ongoing attempt to transform existing web infrastructure
from a collection of meaningless documents to a web of data with well-deﬁned

relationships (Berners-Lee et al. 2001). In the context of web demographics, the
semantic web may empower “smart” agents that can discover, navigate, and extract
relevant demographics from distributed sources rg eardless of their diverseformatting
and frequent design updates.
   Another option is the deep web approach that focuses on the development of

novel crawler algorithms to discover the “hiddenﬁles” (e.g., database) that are
typically buried behind the web interface and dynamically created content. A deep
search for web demographics would return any information related to the keywords
searched by the query string, whether it is about a restaurant, a person, or an object.
More work is needed to screen out the vast volume of irrelevant and redundant
information (e.g., multimedia ﬁles) from the desired content. An ideal hybrid of the

two approaches, in which the acquisition program can crawl through the deep web
and understand the meaning of the search, is a topic to be further explored.
   While the acquisition of web demographics can be conducted with a more
ﬂexible schedule than conventional demographics surveying, there is a lack of
understanding on how often the procedure should be repeated for continuous

population monitoring. How frequently web demographics are acquired largely
depends on the currency of data (the time difference between actual event and d baatsae
update) relative to the temporal requirement for a speciﬁc application. For example,
it may be desirable to study the short-term and long-term impacts of Hurricane
Katrina on population redistribution at arious scales. Processing achange ofaddress

from the US post ofﬁce takes approximately seven to ten postal business days. It is
uncertain how much time it would take for the web demographics to be updated
through this bureaucratic process (Landsbergen   2004 ) .
   As mentioned, the web demographics are compiled from multiple sources. In
this regard, one may refer to the web demographics accessible through the people-

ﬁnder sites as secondary data sources compiled from the primary data sources
15   “We Know Who You Are and We Know Where You Live”: A Research...                   271


  Table 15.1A preliminary assessment of common people-ﬁnder sites on their uniqueness of
database, spatial precision of address, and minimum search criteria

                           Uniquenessa                Address     Minimum search criteria

Address.com               Same as WhitePages.com Full           Last name and zip code
 Addresses.com              Unique                     Full         Last name and zip code
AnyWho.com                Same as Addresses.com     Full        Last name and zip code

 Classmates.com             Unique                     –            Last name and graduation
                                                                    information
 Intelius.com               Unique                     City         Last name and state

 Facebook.com               Unique                     City         Anything
 Myspace.com                Unique                     City         Anything
PeopleFinder.com          Same as Addresses.com     Full        Last name and zip code

 PeopleFinders.com          Unique                     City         Last name and city
 Pipl.com                   Integrated                 Full         Last name and zip code
 PublicRecordsNow.com       Unique                     City         Last name and city

 MyLife.com                 Unique                     Full         Full name
Spock.com                 Same as Intelius.com      City        Last name and state
Switchboard.com           Same as Addresses.com     Full        Last name and zip code

 USA-peoplesearch.com       Unique                     City         Last name and zip code
 Ussearch.com               Unique                     City         Full name and city
 People.yahoo.com           Integrated                 –            Last name and city/zip code

 WhitePages.com             Unique                     Full         Last name and zip code
 Wink.com                   Integrated                 City         Last name and city/zip code
 Zabasearch.com             Unique                     Full         Last name and city
a
 The category “integrated” indicates “deep” searchthat integrates ﬁndings from multiplesecondary
data sources
bThe category “full” indicates full address at the street level





of various public and private institutions in which people “volunteered” their per-
sonal information. A limitation on tracing the data genealogy is the unwillingness

of secondary data vendors to reveal their distributed sources of demographic
information. In the era of information explosion, it is not uncommon to resell, or
share under agreement, value-added information among the data vendors (Phillip

2005). Thus, it may be difﬁcult to identify the exact origin(s) of certain demo-
graphic attributes and distinguish the primary data sources. This would be an

interesting subject to examine using informetric laws (e.g., Zipf’s law) with the
number of data sources to demographic records (Egghe 2005). On the other hand,

people-ﬁnder sites are more straightforward for assessment because they serve as
gateways for accessing web demographics. Future research in this area should

evaluate the performance of secondary data sources in terms of database coverage,
uniqueness, precision, accuracy and currency, query requirement, and demo-

graphics available (some ofthese topics will be discussed in the “validation” sec     tion
to come). For example, a secondary data source may provide street-level addresses

while others may include only city references, along with additional demographic
attributes (Table 15.1 ).
272                                                                       T.E. Chow

 Table 15.2A subset of web demographics with hypothetical data

ID      Name            Address                 Data source          Phone        DOB
1       Enoch Y. Le      760 Mccallum Blvd        Addresses.com       123-4567      –
2       Enoch Y. Le      709 West Way             Whitepages.com      –             –

3       Enoch Y. Le      4060 Midrose Trl         Zabasearch.com      765-4321      –
4       Enoch Y. Le      7575 Frankford Rd        Zabasearch.com      123-4567      3/1968
5       Enoch Le        709 West Way             Addresses.com        –            –
6       Enoch Le        760 Mccallum Blvd        Zabasearch.com       716-2534     3/1968




   15.3.2      Processing


Once web demographics are acquired from distributed data sources, it is likely that
the returned data will consist of incomplete, irrelevant,ﬁctitious, and duplicated
records. The goal of the next procedure in processing the web demographics is to

compile and consolidate the returned records into a centralized database. In order to
generate reliable results for interpretation, it is crucialﬁconduct theappropriate
quality assurance/quality control (QA/QC) measures to screen out invalid records.

   Querying any search engines, including peopleﬁ -nder sites, oftenyields irrelevant
returns. For a valid record of web demographics, the mandatory demographic attri-
butes include a ﬁrst name or ﬁrst initial, a valid surname, and a “geocodable” address
 (Word et al., n.d.; Chow et al. 2011). It is not uncommon to have incomplete data

that may consist of records without a full name, a name without address, or the other
way around. Thus, a preliminary check is needed to screen out invalid web degmraph-
ics, including records with a company name (i.e., xx.Inc) or a “PO Box” address.

In addition to the simple database functions to check null values, natural language
processing (NLP) techniques in linguistic science can improve syntax parsing and
semantics validation of essential demographic attributes (Métais 2002 ) .

  An important component in processing is duplicate detection and removal.
Duplicate records are multiple records with varying degrees of similarity. There has
been active research to remove duplicates in databases (Low et al.    2001 ) , image

processing (Cheng et al.   2011), and information redundancy (Li et al.     2005 ) .
In most applications, duplicate removal strikes a delicate balance between precision
(the level of exactness necessary to be unique demographic records) and recall

(completeness in terms of the total number of demographic records). In web demo-
graphics, a unique record can be deﬁned as “a person having a unique combination
of ﬁrst name, last name, and any optional demographic attributes, including street

address, age, and name(s) of other household members” (Chow et al.2011 ) . Tabl1e5.2
illustrates the difﬁculty of distinguishingpeople through inclusionof optional demo-
graphic attributes, such as middle initial, date of birth (DOB), and/or phone number.
Should the second andﬁfth records be the same person due to identical address?

Should the fourth and sixth records be the same person due to identical DOB, or the
ﬁrst and fourth records because of identical phone number? The decisions regarding
how to identify duplicates and how the demographic attributes would be merged
15  “We Know Who You Are and We Know Where You Live”: A Research...              273


imply different assumptions about migration, change of name/contact, and cultural
practices. For example, Nagata (1999) reported a strong correlation between name
change and succession to family headship and inheritance among Japanese families.

Therefore, it is important to understand the cultural variation among targeted ethnic
groups and realize the appropriate assumptions to be used in processing web demo-
graphics. Duplicate removal can also beneﬁt from more research in the quantitative
assessment of syntax and semantic similarity among the web demographics (Oliva
et al.2011 ) .

   A complicating factor in processing web demographics is the deliberate insertion
of dummy records as a security measure by the data vendors. However, by matching
the administration records, the detection of such artiﬁcial data is possible (e.g., the
NUMIDENT ﬁle produced by the US Social Security Administration ofﬁce or the
Hundred Percent Unedited File of US Census 2000). Depending on the currency of

the data, there may be temporal mismatch between the reference and web dem   graph-
ics. Unfortunately, an unmatched record in the web demographics can be a dummy
record or a valid record indicating an illegal immigrant. There is simply no way to
conﬁrm unless the record is ﬁeld validated (ovrriﬁed by the datavendors).Moreover,
these personalﬁles from the government are regulated due to privacy and have

limited access. Along this line ofinquiry, (geographic)data-masking techniques,such
as substituting, shufﬂing, encryption, etc. are commonto protect the con ﬁ dentiality
of individual record without compromising the underlying pattern (Armstrong et al.
1999 ) . Gujjary and Saxen2   a01(1)proposed a neural network approach for data
masking that would honor the semantics of original data. More research is needed

to understand the impact of such database techniques and their appropriateness for
population monitoring.




   15.3.3       Validation

To demonstrate the potential of web demographics as an alternative data source to

monitor population dynamics, it is important to validate web demographics in terms
of coverage and accuracy.
   Despite the vast amount of data available from diverse data sources, web demo-
graphics may represent a large pool of the population while omitting some people,
a problem of any enumeration record. The exact coverage rate of web demographics

among the general population, as compared to the actual number or the reference
documented in census statistics, is not known. To illustrate the level of uncertainty,
the Vietnamese-American (VA) population will be used as an example. Chow et al.
 (010) employed 91 popular Vietnamese surnames to search for VA in Texas during

2009. The pilot study returned about 40.3% and 10.4% of the total VA count of
202,003 from WhitePages and Intelius ( www.intelius.com) based on the American
Community Survey (ACS) 2009 (Table 15.3). A follow-up search in Addresses
( www.addresses.com) and Zabasearch returned 81,440 (40.3%) and 101,061 (50%)
274                                                                                  T.E. Chow







                                         a















































                                          Intelius                      WhitePages                Addresses                  Zabasearch








                                        The coverage of web demographics of Vietnamese-Americans in Texas



                                        Table 15.3Valiadteaorresdceodrdrsecords20,18,–3(1–09.3) )of unique r81,378,545033422)(2)%s, Addresses, and Zabasearch
15  “We Know Who You Are and We Know Where You Live”: A Research...              275


records, respectively. The post-processing procedure mentioned in the previous
section removed invalid and duplicate records (by consolidating with records
from multiple people-ﬁnder sites) and yielded 53,425 (26.4%), 58,245 (28.8%),

and 74,865 (37.1%) records from WhitePages, Addresses, and Zabasearch, respec-
tively. As Intelius only returned city reference but not street-level addresses
(Table 15.1), the web demographics of Intelius were not used in compiling the
centralized web demographic database. Thus, the VA count from WhitePA    agded,resses,
and Zabasearch totals 186,535 (92.3%) unique records with addresses that can be

address-matched in Texas.
   The VA surnames have unique spellings distinguishable from surnames of
other races/ethnicities (Lauderdale and Kestenbaum 2000), and hence a targeted
search of web demographics among VA seemed to be suitable. While a high coverage
rate of VA web demographics does not guarantee a similar coverage for other

races/ethnicities, the literature suggests that surname analysis is effective in identi-
fying ethnic minorities, including Hispanics (Perkins 1993 ) , South Asians (Shah
et al.2010), Chinese (Quan et al.2006), Middle Easterners (Nasseri2007 ,)andother
Asian ethnic minorities (e.g., Koreans, Japanese, Indians, and Filipinos) (Lauderdale
and Kestenbaum 2000). It is possible to utilize the popular surnames among other

races/ethnicities to examine the web demographics returned from the people-ﬁnder
sites. Nevertheless, intermarriage, name change, adoption, and self-identity can
introduce uncertainties (Perkins 1993). For example, many studies used Hispanic
surnames to identify Hispanic men and women with a high degree of overall
accuracy (Perez-Stable et al. 1995; Morgan et al. 2004), but noticeable errors are

observed among the Hispanic married women, Filipinos, and Native Americans
(Barreto et al. 2008). More research is needed to examine the coverage rate of web
demographics among other ethnic groups with a particular focus on married women
(Wei et al. 2006 ) .

   It must be noted, however, that in some cases surname analysis is limited in
identifying race/ethnicity. For example, the surname “Lee” is common among non-
Hispanic Whites, African Americans, Koreans, and Cantonese-speaking Chinese.
Thus, a targeted search using surnames shared by multiethnic races may return a
mixed population. Nevertheless, such information may still be useful to monitor the

dynamics of the general population, regardless of races/ethnicities. To estimate
the representativeness of web demographics, the list of most frequently occurring
surnames (US Census Bureau 2010)can be used to evaluate the coverage of web
demographics for the population at large. Whether the goal is to search for the
web demographics of a speciﬁc group or of the general population, it is important

to “design a well-constructed list of representative surname samples that strike a ﬁne
balance between the anticipated type I or II errors in statistics” (Chow et al.11 ) .
   Aside from the coverage rate, the accuracy of web demographics is of paramount
concern. An ideal accuracy assessment of web demographics should consist of a
well-planned ﬁeld survey that samples individual households over a region an wdithin

a similar time frame. However, the willingness of invited candidates to complete
the survey and the level of trust necessary for disclosure of personal information
may introduce uncertainties into the accuracy assessment. To evaluate the quality of
276                                                                         T.E. Chow


web demographics, the assessment may be partitioned into demographic attribute
correctness, positional accuracy, and temporal currenyc. No accuracy assessmenthas
been reported to date in these regards.

   As web demographics originate from public and private data, clerical and
typographic mistakes may present errors. Each demographic attribute, such as
name (ﬁrst, middle, and last), age, household members, etc., can be evaluated by a
simple accuracy measurement. For a qualitative attribute (e.g., name), any typo-
graphical mismatch can be considered as an incorrect entry. Thus, the accuracy

of qualitative demographic attributes can be determined by the frequency of correct
entries over total responses. Similarly, the quantitative attributes, such as age, can
adopt descriptive statistics to explore the distribution of error between the surveyed
and web demographics.
   Positional accuracy of web demographics canbe evaluated bythe grounddistance

between the best-measured location of the residence and the position addrem  ss,tched
on the basis of the last address reported in the web demographics. Positional
accuracy can be affected by both the source error and processing error (Goodchild
1989). For web demographics, any distortion in the data source implies an outdated
or incorrect address being used, and the source error equates to the ground distance

between the updated (if known) and the outdated addresses, geocoded by the
same method. It goes without saying that the source error is intrinsically correlated
to the temporal currency of web demographics. By connecting an address to a
point in a predeﬁned coordinate system,the process error indicatesthe performance
of an address-matching process, which largely depends on the effectiveness of the

matching algorithm and the quality of reference data.
   Swift et al. (2008) reviewed eight geocoding systems, including both the desktop
and web-mapping solutions (e.g., Google Maps Application Programming Interface),
and reported that addresses with higher source error may beneﬁt from a simpler

address-matching algorithm, and vice versa. The positional accuracy of web demo-
graphics, in terms of both source and processing errors, can provide helpful insights
into the reliability of spatial analysis that utilizes web demographics.
   Temporal currency refers to the “degree to which the database is complete and
up-to-date” (Goodchild2008), and it may affect both demographic attribute corrn  eetss

and positional accuracy. Temporal currency can be described by the dual aspects
of the latest timestamp and relative timeliness in web demographics. The latest
timestamp is the last known date/time when the demographics were veriﬁed or
updated, and its assessment is relatively straightforward. Depending on when a
life event occurs, such as relocation, an older timestamp may not necessarily equate

to an incorrect or outdated entry. On theother hand, the differencebetween theexact
moment of an actual event and the time when the web demographics reﬂected
the corresponding update indicates the relative timeliness of a record. In reality,
the exact time of a life event may not be captured by the web demographics, and the
uncertain origin of a primary data source may result in a fuzzy relative timeliness.

Future work can explore the relationships among coverage, demographic attribute
correctness, positional accuracy, and temporal currency (i.e., the latest timestamp and
relative timeliness if available) ofweb demographics and examine thespatiotemporal
landscape of a given population.
15   “We Know Who You Are and We Know Where You Live”: A Research...             277


   15.3.4       Applications


A major motivation of gathering personal-level web demographics is to better
understand the customer proﬁle for marketing purposes (Linberger and White    1998 ) .
Some people-ﬁnder sites such as Intelius and PeopleFinders ( www.PeopleFinders.

com) sell value-added web demographics by offering various paid subscription
plans for further personal details, including marriage status,ﬁnancial history, etc.
Corporate employers and legal services often utilize such information to acquire
criminal checks and credit reports on prospective candidates. Conventional geode-
mographics have been used to derive indicators for social networking (Singleton

and Longley 2009 ) .
   While the solicitation of web demographics istypically tailored for anindividual,
automating such a process makes it easier to acquire the web demographics of a
population sample (Chow et al2 .011 ) . A recesttdy compared theweb demographics
of VA in Texas during 2009 with the Census 2000 data to explore the potential of

web demographics for population monitoring (Chow et al.2010 ) . By examining the
data distribution of areas in which there are high discrepancies between web
samples and Census 2000 references, various counties and census tracts that
experienced signiﬁcant population gain or deﬁcit were identiﬁed. The spatial
pattern of signiﬁcant population change was found to be consistent with the urban-

to-suburban migration typically observed aroundthe city edge ofmajor metropolitan
areas in Texas, as well as the rural–urban migration in coastalﬁshery settlements
(Chow et al. 2010). Thus, the results from this pilot study unveiled the potential of
web demographics to map the spatial distribution of a population group and monitor
the group’s movement over time.

   With a carefully designed surname list, it is possible to extend the systematic
acquisition of web demographics to multiethnicraces with distinguishablesurnames.
While the coverage and accuracy of web demographics have yet to be validated
by a large-scale ﬁeld survey, this alternative data source may prove complementary to
the conventional census enumeration. As ethnic minorities are often subjected

to undercount in census (Anderson and Fienberg1999), web demographics of these
population subgroups can be used to estimate the net under-/overcount bymatching
the enumeration record between the web and census demographics. The dual
system estimation (DSE) adopts a capture-recapture method to adjust the estimation

of population size (Wright2000). It is not known; however, the degree to which web
demographics may suffer from correlation bias, the problem of missing population
in both demographic surveys, and how it may affect census adjustment.
    In addition to a custom search of web demographics for ethnic minorities, future
research can also examine its extension to the general population regardless of

races/ethnicities by using a list of popular names, such as the 1,000 most frequently
occurring surnames from Census 2000 (US Census Bureau          2010 ) . Theoretically,
an exhaustive web search of all surveyed surnames is similar in scope to Census
2.0 – an enumeration strategy that uses Web 2.0 technologies to survey the demo-
graphics of unique individuals from the Internet. In Census 2000, about 89.8%

of the US population shared 151,671 surnames, which approximates 2.4% of all
278                                                                         T.E. Chow


surnames surveyed (Word et al., n.d.). Because web demographics can be acquired
at a much lower cost than a traditional census, with aﬂexible schedule and in a
repeatable manner, it warrants continued research to examine the population      dis-

placement in response to a speciﬁc event, such as a disaster or an economic recseisn.
Upon the validation of web demographics, a comparative study with other poputlia   on
distribution datasets, such as LandScan, will provide valuable insights for veriﬁcation
of the global database and foster possible integration of multi-scale study in micro-
demographics and macrodemographics (Bhaduri        2011 ) .

   Web demographics can be helpful to resolve community issues as well. Local
communities can create limited demographic databases reﬂecting the values of their
local neighborhood or communities. As indicated by Seeger (2008), one of the key
challenges in VGI projects is to promote public awareness of and participation
in such opportunities. The use of web demographics can help target relevant sth akled-

ers and enhance the response rate for a VGI project through a cyberinfrastructure
support system (e.g., www.citsci.org) (Newman et al.2011 ) . Web personal md     icaato
enable spatial analyses at the neighborhood level in order to address problems
within acommunity. This capability is particularly important in cultural commutnie is
(e.g., ethnic minorities) that need to allocate limited resources to the targeted group

and require VGI for decision making, such as landscape planning (Seeger 2008 ) .
   The integration of other VGI, such as CommonCensusht(tp://www.commonces        nus.
org), can assist the investigation of the cultural landscape, including its factors,
impacts, and implications to enhance community building and problem-solving.
Such a community-based demographic database can contribute geographic and

demographic dimensions to the formation of location-based social networks for
applications such as geoportal development (De Longueville 2010 ) and epidemic
monitoring (Firestone et al.2011). In fact, WhitePages has recently launched a VGI
platform (neighbors.whitepages.com) that allows individuals to claim their personal

proﬁles and connect with their neighbors for community building. Such community
proﬁles can improve the discourse of geodemographic analysis and enhance
customized local deals, advertising, and marketing strategies based on place-based
demographics and personal behavioral proﬁle, such as usage history and search
preference (Goss 1995). Thus, VGI-enabled local search will play an increasingly

important role in mobile applications. A community-based demographic database
can also enrich related research in “ecological momentary assessment” that tracked
the activity space of volunteering individuals to unearth social interaction, mental
health, and behavioral outcomes (Browning 2011 ) .
   Aside from linguistic or racial/ethnic connections, a surname may also reveal the

physical bonding to a landscape, a hint to common ancestry, and a window to study
population structure (Lasker   1985; Lasker and Mascie-Taylor 1990 ) . Toponymic
surnames (named after a place or a village) are common in some cultures (e.g.,
Bath in Britain) and are found to have higher frequency around areas of origin
(Kaplan and Lasker1983). Isonymy explores the pattern of common surnames over

space; not surprisingly, the landscape of surnames is consistent with Tobler’s ﬁrst
law of geography: near places have more similar names than those from afar (Tobler
1970 ) . Longley et a2l0. 11) used surname frequency data from an electoral registry
15   “We Know Who You Are and We Know Where You Live”: A Research...              279


to study population dynamics of human migration. Their results from hierarchical
clustering and multidimensional scaling identiﬁed regions with similar surname
compositions and concluded that clusters of people who share common surnames
tend to stay in proximate locations (Longley et al.   2011 ) . Web demographics can

serve as a contemporary source of surname data needed for isonymic analysis.



   15.3.5       Privacy


The acquisition of personal data has been a long-standing issue with regard to
information privacy, which is often perceived as a person’s “ability to control
the collection or dissemination of information about himself or herself” (Elwood
and Leszczynski 2011). A question central to the issue of privacy over web
demographics is the ownership of information. As personal data propagates

from individuals to the primary data source(s) and to secondary users, what are the
ownership “rights,” as well as responsibilities, for each actor involved? Elwood
and Leszczynski( 2011)called for a reconsideration of privacy and protection
practices in light of new multimedia (e.g., pictures from Google Street View) and
the transformation of people’s roles and relationships among civil, corporate, asntate

actors. In general, the civil actors of web demographics did not permit the disclo-
sure of their personal data on the web, but they might have indirectly contributed
to the assembly of web demographics by publishing their information through
social networking sites and other online agreements (e.g., registering for an online
sweepstake). Thus, the reconceptualization of privacy in light of web demographics

may be different from the call for VGI and that of traditional geodemographics.
   Privacy concerns can affect the quality of demographic surveying. Despite the
constitutional mandate for a census in the USA, there have been reoccurring public
controversies over the details of demographic data required, enumeration strategies,
and channels of data dissemination, such as the now-defunct decennial census long

form (Robbin 2001). Concerns about personal privacy would affect the response
rate among a small but signiﬁcant percentage of participating citizens (Singer et al.
1993). Web demographics are typically acquired from primary data sources without
permission from the “volunteers.” Hence, it is doubtful if the civil actors would trust
or have conﬁdence in theinstitutions responsible for thecollection anddissemination
of web demographics. Social networking sites have been identiﬁed as important

data sources for a new model of geodemographic proﬁling (Singleton and Longley
2009). A recent review on social networking sites revealed that adult users are more
concerned about potential threats to information privacy than younger users (Hugl
2011). It is not known how the differential privacy concerns among and within voau  ris
population groups may affect the quality, in terms of both coverage and accuracy, of

the web demographics.
    Goss 1(995) argued that not only are privacy issues at stake, but incomplete or
inaccurate information presented in web demographics may result in socioeconomic
mislabeling and a reduction of one’s identity to “you are where you live.” Moreover,
280                                                                         T.E. Chow


the interconnection and intertwining of institutional and corporate databases lays
down the infrastructure for “dataveillance” –the surveillance of indi iduals’ behavior
through an electronic data trail, including mobile and Internet usage. Technological
advancements such as location-aware browsing and the culture of real-time sharing

pave the way for more current updates for web demographics. In light of the ever-
evolving web and mobile technologies, the societal and scientiﬁc implications of
web demographics have yet to be unpacked.
   Societal concerns and public discourse about information privacy drive the
demand for appropriate practices of privacy protection. Some people-ﬁnder sites

such as WhitePages adopt the opt-out approach for privacy protection. Any indi-
vidual who wishes to remove his or her record from a published listing must request
to be concealed from being “searchable.” However, there is no guarantee that the
removed information would be unavailable permanently because personal data
may be reacquired and republished due to the updates of life events from primary
data sources, such as moving or change of name (WhitePages     2011 ) . Data shuf ﬂ ing

techniques, such as geographic masking, can be used to protect the privacy and
conﬁdentiality of personal data on the web while balancing the need to analyze
spatially aggregated demographics (Kwan et al.2004). However, such practices can
undermine the commercial objectives of people-ﬁnder sites and their potential
applications for a targeted search of an individual.




   15.3.6       Other Related Issues


In addition to the societal implications of web demographics, it is important to
understand the role society has had on shaping the landscape of web demographics.

A good example is the digital divide (the differential access to information and
technology among population groups with varying levels of socioeconomic and
demographic composition). As web demographics have originated from analog
transactions and digital traces, it is possible that some population groups are less
represented in the web demographics (e.g., young dependents, illegal immigrants, or
otherwise disadvantaged groups). Theoretically, these population groups may still

leave a trace of demographic transactionon public records (e.g.,utility subscriptions,
applications for credit cards, drivers’ license. or broadband Internetusage,Prieger
and Hu (2008) reported that race and ethnicity are important factors responsible
for the digital divide while holding income, education, and demographic factors
constant. They also found that competition among Internet providers may narrow

the gap in the number of Internet subscribers and improve the quality of service,
indicating that remote communities may experience physical barriers to digital
access and representation. In light of these ﬁndings, racial/geographic disparity in
web demographics may be partially attributed to the digital divide of Internet access.
More research is needed to explore the common causes on coverage disparity of

web demographics and how it may be empirically related to the digital divide.
15  “We Know Who You Are and We Know Where You Live”: A Research...             281


   Metadata is another area of interest for VGI research. Producers of VGI, unlike
the conventional producers of geospatial data, may be motivated to document
effective metadata. From a privacy protection perspective, however, metadata
may be of particular concern in producing or updating web demographics. It is not

known if a “user-centric approach” would improve metadata production for web
demographics (Goodchild    2008). By adopting a Wikipedia approach of VGI (Sui
2008), an automatic timestamp can be produced in the metadata of web demograph-
ics whenever an individual record is veriﬁed or updated. An automatic timestamp is
an example of object-level metadata (Chap.    4). Among the lessons to be learned

from Wikipedia, the complete history of revision, the use of data mining, and the
framework of ﬂagging reﬁned, unreﬁned, or problematic content are most valuable
to the metadata of VGI (Hardy 2010). On the other hand, ancillary metadata, or
metadata squared, of web demographics can be social media that introduces the
swirling universe of other sociocultural characteristics about this person beyond
the basic description of demographic attributes (Chap. 4). Thus, the VGI approach

of metadata production is relevant to web demographicsand can serve asa showcase
for broader geospatial data.
   Because the collection of demographic data relies on individual compliance,
psychological and sociocultural factors may inﬂuence an individual’s willingness to
provide accurate and complete data. Forx eample, the degree towhich ethnicminority

and immigrant individuals identify with the mainstream culture may affect the
individual’s level of compliance with the data-gathering process of the census
(Berry et al.2006). Cultural factors, as well as differences in education, citizenship,
and age, are contributing factors to civil participation and engagement (Uhlaner
et al. 1989). As migration is becoming more common in a global village, an indi-

vidual’s psychological acculturation strategy may provide useful insights to predict
the individual’s level of compliance with the gathering of demographic data (Berry
et al. 2006). Thus, a better understanding of psychological acculturation strategies
may be helpful to interpret the accuracy and coverage of web demographics among
various racial and ethnic groups.



   15.4      Summary and Concluding Remarks


This chapter began by examining web demographics as a kind of VGI. Using a
preliminary VGI framework as an assessment, web demographics is similar to
conventional VGI in terms of its chaotic structure of instant and cross-referenced
information, produced by an ambiguous role of contributors within a compressed

timescale (Goodchild  2007). However, it is perhaps most different in the motivation
of “volunteers.” Web demographics may serve as a case demanding a verdict to
reevaluate the nature and the taxonomy of “volunteerism” in VGI.
   In many social studies, the primary source, and very often the only source, of
demographic data is the ofﬁcial census. However, census demographics are subject

to a speciﬁc temporal interval (e.g., ranging from 1 to 10 years in general) and scale
  282                                                                                 T.E. Chow


  (i.e., aggregated into varying geographical areas). Demographic data “on demand”

  at the personal level were not available before the recent discovery of web demo-
  graphics for population monitoring. Thus, although temporal currency has yet to be
  validated, the web provides gigantic “nearly” real-time personal level demographic

  data to anyone with Internet access. More research and development are needed to
  validate the coverage and accuracyof web demographics, enhanceextractionrules of

  web demographics, identify and remove erroneous enumeration (i.e., duplicate,
 ﬁctitious, and incomplete records), explore potential applications, and overcome

  probable shortcomings. The utilization of web demographics must be cautious with
  regard to their uncertainties, privacy issues, and societal impacts. Nevertheless, web
  demographics present an alternative data source for future research.


   AcknowledgmentsThe author is thankful to Yan Lin, who provided valuable assistance in ppraering
  the statistics of web demographics acquired from several people-ﬁnder sites. Collaboration with

  colleagues and fellow students, including Niem Huynh, David Parr, John Davis, and Anne Ngu, on
  projects related to web demographics is instrumental to the ideas articulated in this manuscript.
  The author is in debt to Nancy Wilson, David Parr, and Niem Huynh for their editorial assistance
  and helpful reviews. The constructive comments from the reviewers greatly improved the quality
  of this manuscript. Any errors in the manuscript are solely the responsibility of the author.




    References


  Anderson, M. J., & Fienberg, S. E. (1999).ho counts? The politics of census-taking in contemorry
     America. New York: Russell Sage.

 Anderson, M. J., & Fienberg, S. E. (2002). Why is there still a controversy about adjusting the
     census for undercount. PSOnline, March, 83–85.
 Armstrong, M. P., Rushton, G., Zimmerman, D. L., et al. (1999). Geographically masking health
     data to preserve conﬁdentiality. Statistics in Medicine, 18 , 497–525.
Barreto, M., DeFrancesco-Soto, V., Merolla, J., & Ramirez, R. (2008).       Latino campaign ad

    experimental study. Los Angeles, CA.
 Berners-Lee, T., Hendler, J., Lassila, O., et al. (2001). The semantic web (Resource document).
     Scienti ﬁ c American Magazine.      http://www.scienti ﬁ camerican.com/article.cfm?id=the-
     semantic-web  . Accessed 26 May 2009.
 Berry, J. W., Phinney, J. S., Sam, D. L., Vedder, P., et al. (2006). Immigrant youth: Acculturation,
     identity, and adaptation. Applied Psychology: An International Review, 55 (3), 303–332.

 Bhaduri, D. (2011). Enhancing resolution of population distribution data in spatial, temporal, and
     sociocultural dimensions: Advances and challenges (Resource document). Specialist meeting
     in future direction of spatial demography .http://ncgia.ucsb.edu/projects/spatial-demography/
     docs/Bhaduri-position.pdf . Accessed 2 Jan 2012.
  Browning, C. R. (2011). Future directions in spatial demography (Resource document).Specialist

     meeting in future direction of spatial demography    .http://ncgia.ucsb.edu/projects/spatial-
     demography/docs/Browning-position.pdf   . Accessed 2 Jan 2012.
  Chang, C., Kayed, M., Girgis, M., Shaalan, K.e,t al. (2006). A surveyof web informationextraction
     systems. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 18 , 1411–1428.
 Cheng, X., Hu, Y., Chia, L.-T., et al. (2011). Exploiting local dependencies with spatial-scale space
     (S-Cube) for near-duplicate retrievl.omputer Vision and Image Understanding, 11(6), 750–758.

Chow, T. E. (2008). The potential of maps APIs for internet GIS.     Transactions in GIS, 12 (2),
     179–191.
  15   “We Know Who You Are and We Know Where You Live”: A Research...                        283


   Chow, T. E. (2011). Geography 2.0: A mashup perspective. In S. Li, S. Dragicevic, & B. Veenendaal

     (Eds.), Advances in web-based GIS, mapping services and applications      (pp. 15–36). Boca
     Raton: CRC Press.
 Chow, T. E., Lin, Y., Huynh, N. T., Davis, J., et al. (2010). Using web demographics to model
     population change of Vietnamese-Americans in Texas between 2000–2009.            GeoJournal .

     doi: 10.1007/s10708-010-9390-6.
  Chow, T. E., Lin, Y., Chan, W. D., et al. (2011). The development of a web-based demographic data
     extraction tool for population monitoring. Transactions in GIS, 15 (4), 479–494.
 Coleman, D. J., Georgiadou, Y., Labonte, J., et al. (2009). Volunteered geographic information:

     The nature and motivation of producers. International Journal of Spatial Data Infrastructures
     Research, 4 , 332–358.
 De Longueville, B. (2010). Community-based geoportals: The next generation? Concepts and
     methods for the geospatial Web 2.0.    Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 34       (4),

     299–308.
  Dobson, J. E., & Fisher, P. F. (2003). Geoslavery. IEEE Technology and Society Magazine, 22 (1),
     47–52.
    Egghe, L. (2005P)o .wer laws in the information production process: Lotkaian informetrics     .

     Amsterdam: Academic.
  Elwood, S., & Leszczynski, A. (2011). Privacy, reconsidered: New representations, data practices,
     and the geoweb. Geoforum, 42 (1), 6–15.
 Firestone, S. M., Ward, M. P., Christley, R. M., Dhand, N. K., et al. (2011). The importance of

     location in contact networks: Describing early epidemic spread using spatial social network
     analysis. Preventive Veterinary Medicine, 102 (2), 185–195.
 Goodchild, M. F. (1989). Modeling errors in objects and ﬁelds. In M. F. Goodchild & S. Gopal
     (Eds.), The accuracy of spatial databases. New York: Taylor & Francis.

  Goodchild, M. F. (2007). Citizens as voluntary sensors: Spatial data infrastructure in the world of
     web 2.0. International Journal of Spatial Data Infrastructure Research, 2 , 24–32.
 Goodchild, M. F. (2008). Spatial accuracy 2.0.   Spatial Uncertainty: Proceedings of the Eighth
     International Symposium on Spatial Accuracy Assessment in Natural Resources and

     Environmental Sciences, 1 , 1–7.
  Goss, J. (1995). We know who you are and we know where you live: The instrumental rationality
     of geodemographic systems. Economic Geography, 71 , 171–198.
   Gujjary, V. A., & Saxena, A. (2011). A neutral network approach for data maskine.urocomputing,

     74 (9), 1497–1501.
  Hardy, D. (2010). The wikiﬁcation of geospatial metadata (Resource document).Workshop on the
     “Role of Volunteered Geographic Information in Advancing Science” .      http://www.ornl.gov/
     sci/gist/workshops/papers/Hardy.pdf . Accessed 21 July 2011.

Hugl, U. (2011). Reviewing person’s value of privacy of online social networking.         Internet
     Research, 21 (4), 1–17.
  Kaplan, B., & Lasker, G. (1983). The present distribution of some English surnames derived from
     place names. Human Biology, 55 (2), 243–250.

 Kwan, M. P., Casas, I., Schmitz, B. C., et al. (2004). Protection of geoprivacy and accuracy of
     spatial information: How effective are geographical masks? Cartographica, 39 , 15–28.
Landsbergen, D. (2004). Screen-level bureaucracy: Databases as public records.        Government
     Information Quarterly, 21 (1), 24–25.

    Lasker, G. (1985 S)u.rnames and genetic structure. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
  Lasker, G., & Mascie-Taylor, C. (1990).Atlas of British surnames. Detroit: Wayne State University
     Press.
 Lauderdale, D. S., & Kestenbaum, B. (2000). Asian-American ethnic identiﬁcation by surname.

     Population Research and Policy Review, 19 , 283–300.
  Li, W., Liu, J., Wang, C., et al. (2005). Web document duplicate removal algorithm based on koywd
     sequences. In Proceedings of 2005 IEEE International Conference on Natural Language
     Processing and Knowledge Engineering (pp. 511–516). Piscataway: IEEE.
 284                                                                                     T.E. Chow


 Linberger, P., & White, G. (1998). Geographic information on the web: Extracting demographic

     and market research information.    Proceedings of the Nineteenth Annual National Online
     Meeting, 19 , 235–242.
 Longley, P. A., Cheshire, J. A., Mateos, P., et al. (2011). Creating a regional geography of Britain
     through the spatial analysis of surnames. Geoforum, 42 (4), 506–516.

 Low, W. L., Lee, M. L., Ling, T. W., et al. (2001). A knowledge-based approach for duplicate,
     elimination in data cleaning. Information Systems, 26 (8), 585–606.
 Métais, E. (2002). Enhancing information systems management with natural language processing
     techniques. Data and Knowledge Engineering, 41 (2–3), 247–272.

 Morgan, R. O., Wei, I. I., Virnig, B. A., et al. (2004). Improving identiﬁcation of Hispanic males
     in Medicare: Use of surname matching. Medical Care, 42 , 810–816.
  Nagata, M. L. (1999). Why did you change your name? Name changing patterns and the life course
     in early modern Japan. The History of the Family, 4 (3), 315–338.

 Nasseri, K. (2007). Construction and validation of a list of common Middle Eastern surnames for
     epidemiological research. Cancer Detection and Prevention, 31 , 424–429.
 Newman, G., Graham, J., Crall, A., Laituri, M., et al. (2011). The art and science of multi-scale
     citizen science support. Ecological Informatics, 6 (3–4), 217–227.

 Oliva, J., Serrano, J. I., del Castillo, M. D., Iglesias, A., et al. (2011). SyMSS: A syntax-based
     measure for short-text semantic similarity.Data and Knowledge Engineering, 70(4), 390–405.
  Perez-Stable, E. J., Hiatt, R. A., Sabogal, F., Otero-Sabogal, R., et al. (1995). Use of Sphasures
     to identify Latinos: Comparison to self-identiﬁcation. Journal of the National Cancer Institute

     Monographs, 18 , 11–15.
 Perkins, R. C. (1993). Evaluating the passel-word Spanish surname list: 1990 decennial census
     post enumeration survey results (Resource document, U.S. Bureau of the Census, Population
     Division Working Paper No. 4).        http://www.census.gov/population/www/documentation/

     twps0004.html  . Accessed 15 July 2011.
 Phillip, M. (2005). Why pay for value-added information?World Patent Information, 27(1), 7–11.
 Prieger, J. E., & Hu, W. (2008). The broadband digital divide and the nexus of race, competition,
     and quality. Information Economics and Policy, 20 (2), 150–167.

Quan, H., Wang, F., Schopﬂocher, D., Norris, C., Galbraith, P. D., Faris, P., Graham, M. M.,
     Knudtson, M. L., Ghali, W. A., et al. (2006). Development and validation of a surname list to
     deﬁne Chinese ethnicity. Medical Care, 44 , 328–333.
 Robbin, A. (2001). The loss of personal privacy and its consequences for social research. Journal

     of Government Information, 28 (5), 493–527.
  Robinson, J. G., & Adlakha, A. (2002).Comparison of A.C.E. revision II results with demographic
     analysis (Resource document, U.S. Bureau of the Census, DSSD A.C.E. Revision II Estimates
     Memorandum Series #PP-41).      http://www.census.gov/dmd/www/pdf/pp-41r.pdf. Accessed 12

     July 2011.
 Seeger, C. J. (2008). The role of facilitated volunteered geographic information in the landscape
     planning and site design process. GeoJournal, 72 (3–4), 199–213.
  Shah, B. R., Chiu, M., Amin, S., Ramani, M., Sadry, S., Tu, J. V., et al. (2010). Surname ltstotify

     South Asian and Chinese ethnicity from secondary data in Ontario, Canada: A validation study.
     BMC Medical Research Methodology, 10, 42. doi:     101186/1471-2288-10-42.
 Singer, E., Mathiowetz, N. A., & Couper, M. P. (1993). The impact of privacy and conﬁdentiality
     concerns on survey participation: The case of the 1990 U.S. census.Public Opinion Quarterly,

     57 (4), 465–482.
  Singleton, A. D., & Longley, P. A. (2009). Geodemographics, visualization, and social networks in
     applied geography. Applied Geography, 29 (3), 289–298.
 Sui, D. Z. (2008). The wikiﬁcation of GIS and its consequences: Or Angelina Jolie’s new tattoo

     and the future of GIS. Computers Environment and Urban Systems, 32 (1), 1–5.
 Swift, J. N., Goldberg, D. W., & Wilson, J. P. (2008). Geocoding best practices: Review of eight
     commonly used geocoding systems (Resource document, University of Southern California
     GIS Research Laboratory Technical Report No 10).    http://spatial.usc.edu/Users/dan/gilsabtr10_
     Eight-Commonly-Used-Geocoding-Systems.pdf        . Accessed 2 Jan 2012.
 15   “We Know Who You Are and We Know Where You Live”: A Research...                      285


 Tobler, W. R. (1970). A computer movie simulating urban growth in the Detroit region.Economic

     Geography, 46 , 34–240.
Tulloch, D. L. (2008). Is VGI participation? From vernal pools to video games.     GeoJournal,
     72 (3–4), 161–171.
 Uhlaner, C. J., Cain, B. E., & Kiewiet, D. R. (1989). Political participation of ethnic minorities in

     the 1980s. Political Behavior, 11 (3), 195–231.
 U.S. Census Bureau. (2010). Genealogy data: Frequently occurring surnames from Census 2000
     (Resource document).      http://www.census.gov/genealogy/www/data/2000surnames/index.
     html. Accessed 15 July 2011.

   U.S. Government Accountability Of ﬁ ce. (200S1i)g.niﬁcant increase in cost per housing unit
     compared to 1990 (Resource document. GAO-02–31).      http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d0231.
     pdf. Accessed 12 July 2011.
   U.S. Government Accountability Of ﬁ ce. (20C 0e8).sus Bureau should take action to improve the

     credibility and accuracy of its cost estimate for the decennial cens(Resource document.
     GAO-08–554).   http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d08554.pdf. Accessed 23 July 2011.
 Wei, I. I., Virnig, B. A., John, D. A., & Morgan, R. O. (2006). Using a Spanish surname match to
     improve identiﬁcation of Hispanic women in Medicare administrative data. Health Research

     and Educational Trust, 41 (4), 1469–1481.
   WhitePages. (2011)W . hitePages privacy central (Resource document).  http://www.whitepage.
     com/help/privacy_central. Accessed 20 July 2011.
 Word, D. L., Coleman, C. D., Nunbziata, R., Kominski, R., et al. (n.d.).Demographic aspects

     of surname from Census 2000, genealogy data: Frequent occurring surnames from Census
     2000(Resource document. US Census Bureau).         http://www.census.gov/genealogy/www/
     data/2000surnames/surnames.pdf  . Accessed 14 July 2011.
 Wright, T. (2000). Census 2000: Who says counting is easy as 1–2–3?   Government Information

     Quarterly, 17 (2), 121–136.
   Chapter 16

Volunteered Geographic Information, Actor-

Network Theory, and Severe-Storm Reports


    Mark H. Palmer         and   Scott Kraushaar









 Abstract In this chapter, we will use actor-network theory to describe a decentralized,
heterogeneous storm-spotting and storm-chasing network in the United States, which
connects human-sensor observations in the ﬁeld with operational meteorologists in
the center of calculation and with television media as the recipients and public dis-

tributors of ofﬁcial severe-weather watches and warnings. In theﬁrst section, we
present actor-network theory as a conceptual framework for describing the co-con-
struction of society and technology and the centering processes associated with
scientiﬁc laboratories and government agencies. In the second section, we demon-
strate the use of actor-network theory (ANT) through a descriptive case study of the

storm-spotter and storm-chaser network, which encompasses both decentralized and
centralized processes. Finally, we analyze the centering processes that the National
Weather Service (NWS) uses to mobilize, stabilize, and combine VGI storm reports
with their existing technologies.




   16.1      Introduction


Emerging research on volunteered geographic information (VGI) is beginning to
conceive of humans as sensors and as enabling geospatial technologies. Goodchild
argued that there are potentially six billion humans as sensors on this planet
(Goodchild 2007a, b). Now, let us assume that Goodchild is speaking of sensors





  M. H. Pal* e)r (
  Department of Geography, University of MissouColumbia , MO , USA
e-mail: palmermh@missouri.edu
  S. Kraushaar
  Department of Geography,University of Missouri , MO , Columbia


D. Sui et al. (eds.), Crowdsourcing Geographic Knowledge: Volunteered Geographic
Information (VGI) in Theory and Practice, DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-4587-2_16,
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
288                                                        M.H. Palmer and S. Kraushaar


as a combination of human senses and digital technologies. If this is the case, doepveld
countries like the United States, the United Kingdom, and Western Europe have far
greater access to digital technologies than people in the developing world; there is

still a signiﬁcant digital divide (Crampton   2010). But let us think abstractly for a
moment and consider the staggering image of six        billion humans (sev en billion
as of October 2011) who are somehow interconnected through an array of digital
gadgets. Now consider the diversityof the world’s population.Heterogeneityabounds
within the diverse knowledge systems making up the world’s population. Online

maps in all languages and featuring a multitude of representations are emerging
into the world – mapping is now at a pinnacle of human participation (Crampton
2010). But, citizens would have dif ﬁ culty achievingtheir geographic or mapping
goals and objectives without access to     enabling technologies like the Internet,
Web 2.0, geotagging, georeferencing, GPS, and graphics (Goodchild2007a, b ) . Yet,

if we think about this for a moment, the idea of humans as sensors takes on an
organic, hybrid, and ecological quality. It is often assumed that humans and their
senses are somehow separate from the technologies they use to Tweet, blog, or geo-
tag online. Segregation of humans and technology can be intellectually        limiting.
Haraway’s cyborg (Haraway 1987) and Goodchild’s VGI humans as sen sors lose

some of their richness and power when viewed through the lenses of dichotomies
like society/technology, human/sensor, or GIS/society. We believe this is so because
it is very difﬁcult to determine what is social about VGI and what is technological.
Our thesis is that VGI is not an object but rather an interconnected network of het-
erogeneous humans, technologies, geographic information, and organizations. This

means that VGI is not solely determined by social factors or by technological fac-
tors. Rather, VGI is equally shaped by society and technology.
   In this chapter, we use actor-network theory (ANT) to describe a decentralized,
heterogeneous storm-spotting and storm-chasing network in the United States

that connects human-sensor observations in the ﬁeld with operational meteorolo-
gists in the center of calculation and with television media as the recipients and
public distributors of ofﬁcial severe-weather watches and warnings. In theﬁrst
section, we present actor-network theory as a conceptual framework for describ-
ing the co-construction of society and technology and the centering processes

associated with scientiﬁc laboratories and government agencies. ANT concepts
used in this chapter include actor, intermediary, network, translation, and center
of calculation. In the second section, we demonstrate the use of ANT through a
descriptive case study of the storm-spotter and storm-chaser network encompass-
ing both decentralized and centralized processes. We will describe the most

signiﬁcant actors and materials used to sense the environment and relay the infor-
mation out into the world. What we construct is a partial network of human sen-
sors. Finally, we analyze the centering processes that the National Weather Service
(NWS) uses to mobilize, stabilize, and combine VGI storm reports with their
existing technologies. On the surface, text bulletins appear to be objects. Center

processes transform local information into a nameless and faceless network that
extends back to the media and general public.
16  Volunteered Geographic Information, Actor-Network Theory…                  289


   16.2      Actor-Network Theory


At the core of the science and technology studies (STS) approach to thccos-truction
of society and technology is actor-network theory (ANT). Initially dev eloped by
Bruno Latour, Michel Callon, and John Law, actor-network theory is a      concep-
tual framework for “exploring collective sociotechnical processes,” describing and

explaining the “relationships between people, institutions, and artifacts connected
by agreements and exchanges” (Harvey   2001, 30). ANT is also a method for tracing
relationships, agreements, and exchanges. Through relationships and agreements,
action is distributed to other spaces, at a distance. In GIS research, Martin ( 2000 )
used ANT as a framework to understand the interactions between GIS and society.
The research showed the interactions between texts, people, money, technology, and

control in the implementation of GIS in Ecuador. The paper suggests that “the best
use of ANT for investigating GIS may be to continue exposing the social interac-
tions behind GIS operations so practitioners, managers, theorists and researchers
will be more sensitive to building stable GIS actor-networks” (Martin 2000 , 735).
Harvey and Chrisman (2004) have also drawn inspiration and conceptual frame-

works from Deleuze’s and Guattari’s(      1987 ) work ornhizomes. Both authors
noted the difﬁculty of interpreting Deleuze and Guattari but also insisted that eco-
logical concepts such as rhizome and strata are useful metaphors for research on
GIS and society. Bruno Latour proposed that actant-rhi zome is a more organic and
better name for his project than ANT (Thrift2000). ANT can inform non-ANT VGI

research that focuses on the multiple combinations of humans, computer hardware,
software, and data structures, creating new methods for analyzing data from the
newly opened pool of sources and on understandingthe effects of VGI on GIScience
(Williams2007; Mummidi and Krumm2008; Bishr and Mantelas 2008 ; Goodchild
2007b; Gartner et al. 2007 ) .
    Nigel Thrift 20(0)wrote that “geographers have become very interested in

actor-network theory” (p. 5). ANT, as a component of the larger body of research
conducted under the banner of STS, has caught the attention of geographers because
the research framework can be used to understand the construction of technology
and nature and is another means of conceptualizing space and place (Thrift 1996,
2000). As a method of analysis, ANT attempts to break up dualities and allows

for theories of heterogeneous associations (Murdoch1997a,b ) . Three review essays
covering literature pertaining to heterogeneous associations (Murdoch      1997b ) ,
world city actor-networks (Smith2003), and hybrid, indigenous ANT (Panelli2010 )
recently emerged. The journals Environment and Planning A and Environment and
Planning D are at the forefront of ANT-geography research. Two studies focused

speciﬁcally on ANT, technology, and the geographies of relations (Bingham 1996 ;
Hinchliffe 1996). Other geographic articles have proposed ANT as a framework
for understanding economic shifts, arguing that networks are “a dominant organiza-
tional form in the post-Fordist era” (Murdoch 1995, 731), and have addressed the
economic ecology of wetlands (Burgess et al.  2000 ) , institutional geographies and

ANT (Davies 2000), and plant-human interactions (Hitchings 2003 ) .
290                                                       M.H. Palmer and S. Kraushaar


   ANT is not without controversy in geography. Scott Kirsch and Don Mitchell
 (2004) are concerned that strong versions of ANT present humans and nonhumans
only as autonomous objects connected within networks. Humans have very little
agency and are not subjected to either oppressive or liberating societal structures.

However, the authors do agree that weak versions of ANT can contribute to
Marxist insights and social theories that have informed materialist social theory
and geography for the past 150 years. They also argue that actor-networks are
often presented in terms of cause-and-effect relationships. However, Kirsch and
Mitchell ( 2004)argue that the agency issue should not be a fatalﬂaw. Their own

viewpoint is that power is situated in centers, individuals, and social relations, and
“in some ways, actor-network studies have indeed been quite effective at showing
how such centering processes occur” (Kirsch and Mitchell 2004 ) . In the sections
to follow, we will lay out some of the ANT concepts and methods associated with
tracing actors, intermediaries, networks, translations, and centers of calculation.




   16.2.1       Actors, Intermediaries, and Networks

Actors are authors. This is what differentiates them from the materials thatﬂow

between them. Actors combine, mix, degrade, compute, and predict materials to
create the next inscription, simulation, model, or map (Callon 1991; Latour 1987 ) .
Actors are not preordained with characteristics. One must trace and read the mate  aris
that ﬂow between them and trace the associated networks to gain more knowledge
about actors. Callon stated that “It is precisely because human action is not only

human but also unfolds, is delegated and is formatted in networks with multiple
conﬁgurations, that the diversity of the action and of the actors is possible” (Callon
1999, 194). Actors, as mediators, transform and put materials into motion. FL oratour,
“an actor is what is made to act by many others” (Latour2005, 46). The origin of an
actor-network begins as a ﬂow of intermediaries between actors.

   Intermediaries are materials, like texts, that carry meaning and give networks
their form (Callon 1991; Latour 2005). For example, Michel Callon wrote that “an
intermediary is anything passing between actors which deﬁnes the relationship
between them…examples of intermediaries include scientiﬁc articles, computer
software, disciplined human bodies, technical artifacts, instruments, contracts and
money” (Callon 1991, 134). Trying to identify and study intermediaries can be an

overwhelming task, which can be overcome by limiting intermediaries to text
inscriptions (social networking dialogues, reports, books, articles, notes), technical
artifacts (machines, hardware, software), human beings (skills), and all forms of
money and funding (Martin    2000; Callon 1991). Texts and technical artifacts, such
as those associated with VGI, help to deﬁne the roles of human and nonhuman

actors in the network (Murdoch 1995). VGI reports connect with other objects,
texts, people, and places. In fact, “Words, ideas, concepts and the phrases that
organize them thus describe the whole population of human and non-hume      antities…
intermediaries describe their networks…and they compose them by giving them
16   Volunteered Geographic Information, Actor-Network Theory…                     291


form” (Callon1991, 135). Conceptualizing networks requires decoding the wording
within intermediaries. Actors author such meanings within intermediaries. Meaning
is inscribed within intermediaries such as maps, GIS layers, weather reports, natural
resource assessments, and digital databases. Words within documents can be traced

to other documents.
   The combination of actors and intermediaries creates heterogeneous networks
(Harvey  2001; Martin2000; Callon1991). From an ANT perspective, human sen        sors
are heterogeneous materials that constitute a network. By following the networks,
it is possible to locate and describe additional groups, identify other signiﬁcant

actors, and trace interconnected intermediaries (Callon1991, 142). Anetworkworks
as “a coordinated set of heterogeneous actors which interact more or less success-
fully to develop, produce, distribute and diffuse methods for generating goods
and services” (Callon1991, 133) as well as distributing VGI. The social and techno-
logical must be explained together, not as a dichotomy (Burgess et al.2000 ) . This is
important here because texts initiate relationships between actors and allow them to

deﬁne one another through interactions (Murdoch1995 ) . Actors can actually de ﬁ ne
one another through their interaction, including the authoring and circulation
of intermediaries from one institution to another (Callon 1991, 135), and through
free association between actors in networks that are extremely dynamic and only
momentarily stable (Burgess et al. 2000; Davies 2000). Because they are dynamic,

much work is required to build and maintain strong networks. Actors need to be
enrolled or otherwise align closely with other actors and intermediaries to maintain
stability. Throughout the process, scientists become powerful by enrolling partp iaints
to help them build durable networks (Murdoch        2006 ) . Translations align actors,
stabilizing or destabilizing networks.




   16.2.2       Translation


Translations are the goals, objectives, and interests that pass between actors and
those they enroll (Latour1987 ) . When extendin   negtworks, actors mustbe convinced
that their goals and interests are aligned withthose of scientists andtheir laboratories
(Murdoch 1997a). To succeed in making networks strong and durable, actors
will select only the people, places, and materials that help them reach their goals.
For example, a scientist attempting to perform a translation might say, “You have a

problem that I can solve, but you have to follow my instructions and guidelines
precisely.” Technical specialists, scientists, engineers, and others “speak in the name
of new allies that they have shaped and enrolled; representatives among other repre-
sentatives, they add these unexpected resources to tip the balance of the force in
their favor” (Latour1987, 259). Translations are inscribed into texts, criteria, nhical

objects, project guidelines, roundtable discussions, conference proceedings, n lettesrs,
embodied skills, and countless other materials (Callon 1991 ) .
   Translation is the process of making two different actors equivalent (Law and
Hassard1999). This requires an alignmentof intermediaries likestorm reports,forest
292                                                       M.H. Palmer and S. Kraushaar


assessments, GIS data standards, or funding. Translation is “an idea that suggests
that if scientiﬁc networks are to be extended through space and time, then actors of
differing (natural and social) types must be ‘interested’ into the network – thatts,eir
goals must somehow be aligned with those of the scientists” (Murdoch 2006 , 62).

Alignment requires some level of normalization (Callon       1991; Murdoch 2006 ) ,
ordering (Davies2000), or a set of criteria that everyone can agree to, like standiddre
data or criteria for classifying severe-weather phenomena. Actors will select only
those translations that will help them maintain their networks and achieve goals
(Latour 1987). Normalization and selectivity allow the networks to achieve their

goals, increasing their ability to do work, to be powerful (Latour 1987 ) .
   Strong network alignment requires convergence of actors, intermediaries, and
translations. Convergence measures the extent of the translation process through the
circulation of intermediaries leading to agreement among actors (Callon        1991 ) .
Intermediaries are inscribed with rules, laws, standards, and meaning embedded
by actors. Such entities are said to display strong coordination, which contributes to

network stabilization. Successful translation processes lead to the stabilization of
networks, and it is possible to trace these networks unproblematically. However,
this alignment is not always the result of translation. Not all actors conform to
network builders’ translations; some actors resist (Burgess et al. 2000 ) . Often there
is controversy and conﬂict resulting from disagreement among actors about the

translation process. This in turn can lead to betrayal when the actor refusing to
accept the role assigned to him or her aligns with another competing network.
These converging networks have boundaries that can be mapped to determine the
reversibility or irreversibility of the network. While vital environmental conditions
may open up, like children being able to create data, others stress that certain groups

may be included or excluded from online spatial data (Zook and Graham 2007a, b ;
Harvey 2007; Goodchild 2007)     a. Convergence of actor-networks is attempted
within the center of calculation.



   16.2.3       Center of Calculation


The center of calculation concept describes the reach of scientiﬁc institutions that
go out to the periphery and collect information. Information is brought back to
the center and turned into scientiﬁc knowledge; one goal of science is to bring

knowledge of the periphery back to the center (Latour      1987). Once back at the
laboratory, the collected items can be studied, and more precise inscriptions made
in the form of maps, manuscripts, models, and simulations. Contemporary scien-
tists construct facts within their laboratories, allowing ofﬁcials and managers to
exert a degree of control on the physical environment. The development and

implementation of models and simulations are very important components of the
control process. By collecting and processing real-world data, scientists and
technicians create virtual maps, models, and simulations, allowing them to experi-
ence the physical environment from within the controlled conﬁnes of laboratories.
16  Volunteered Geographic Information, Actor-Network Theory…                      293


Engagement with models and simulations allows scientists and engineers to perfect
techniques like forecasting severe weather, controlling theﬂow of a river, or the
management of natural resources before experiencing the real thing. Scientists

create hundreds of models and run thousands of simulations in an effort to get the
desired results in real-world situations (Latour     1987 ) . Contemporary scientists
construct facts within their laboratories, allowing ofﬁcials and managers to exert
a degree of control on the physical environment. The development and implemen-
tation of models and simulations are very important components of the control

process. Through laboratory experiences, knowledge is created. The construction
of scientiﬁc knowledge, tied to economic and political systems, gives those in the
center an advantage over people, places, and things on the periphery. These con   toins
can convert a seemingly insigniﬁcant place into a center that can dominate the
periphery from a distance (Latour 1987 ) .

   Centers of calculation are places where intermediaries holding information, VGI,
data, maps, numbers, and inscriptions are brought together and organized. This is a
historical condition. Empires send actors such as naturalists, cartographers, gepohgerras,
anthropologists, and technicians out into the world to collect and make initial
inscriptions of people, places, and things located in faraway places. The process of

going out, collecting, and returning to the center is known as a cycle of accumula-
tion. There are often multiple cycles of accumulation. Each time an expedition goes
out and returns, it brings back more information that can be used to return and claim
additional natural resources or other materials. The accumulation of information
about distant places gives the centers of calculation advantages over the periphery,

allowing the centers to perform action from afar (Latour 1987 ) . The collection of
climatic data over the past 200 years is an extreme example of accumulation cycles
(hourly, daily, weekly, monthly, yearly).
   The center of calculation acts at a distance by mobilizing, stabilizing, and com-

bining data with maps, GIS, and other materials. One geographer writes, “In the
geography of actor-networks, a crucial issue is how actors are able to mobilize
networks to act at a distance” (Murdoch 1995, 749). Ideas associated with centers
of calculation have been incorporated into the works of some geographers (Palmer
2009, 2012; Kirsch 2002; Harris 2004; Martin 2000). It is important for the centers

of calculation, like the NWS or the United States Geological Survey (USGS), to
maintain the stability of the materials collected and inscriptions created “so that
they can be moved back and forth [between the center and periphery] without
additional distortion, corruption or decay” (Latour1987, 223). For museums, speci-
mens like plants, animals, bones, North American Indian medicine bundles, shields,

weapons, housing, clothing, and maps need to be preserved so that the centers of
calculation can produce more inscriptions and more knowledge about peoples
and ecosystems on the periphery. Stabilization also involves taking local knowledge
out of its context and placing it into a scientiﬁc classiﬁcation scheme and inco rrtng
standards so that new materials and inscriptions can be made combinable. Centers

combine past and present materials and construct maps, database layers, tables,
and charts (Latour1987). Once the materials are stable, standardized, and comb    anle,
the information and knowledge produced by anthropologists or geographers or
294                                                      M.H. Palmer and S. Kraushaar


geologists or meteorologists can be combined with seemingly distant entities such
as economic institutions, missionary organizations, academic institutions, corptias,n
or broadcast media outlets to perform action at a distance (Latour 1987 ) .
   To brieﬂy recap, GIS researchers use the ANT framework to describe the

multiple combinations of human/nonhuman actors and their intermediaries that
make up an actor-network. The glue that makes actor-network connections possible
is called translations. Some translations are successful and actor-network conver-
gence results. Other times, translations fail and actor-networks weaken. Powerful
actors that reside within centers of calculation manipulate actor-networks to their

advantage. Centers of calculation mobilize, stabilize, and combine information
into standardized models, maps, or simulations so they can act at a distance. In the
sections to follow, ANT will be used to describe an actor-network of human sensors
consisting of actors including storm chasers, NWS meteorologists, television
media, and multiple intermediaries, creating a general symmetry between society
and technology.




   16.3       Storm-Spotting and Storm-Chasing Actor-Network


The storm-spotting and storm-chasing network is an amalgamation of humans,
skills, technologies, and texts that aredynamic and constantly changing.The primary
actors are storm spotters, a heterogeneous group of storm chasers, operational
meteorologists, and television media. All of the actors are deﬁned by intermediaries
that included skills, technologies, and texts. Below is a brief historical overview of

storm-spotting and storm-chasing origins, followed by a generalized description
of a decentralized, heterogeneous actor-network in the United States that connects
storm spotters and chasers in the ﬁeld, operational meteorologists in the center of
calculation, and television media as the recipients of ofﬁcial severe-weather watches
and warnings.

   Technological innovations, public awareness, training, and scientiﬁc research
inﬂuenced the development of storm spotting and chasing in the United States dur-
ing the twentieth century. The origins of storm spotting can be traced back to
World War II and the military’s concern that ammunition depots and other instal-
lations might be at risk of being damaged or destroyed by severe weather (Bates
1962; Galaway1985). In addition, technological innovations like television, radio,

telephones, and weather radar-shaped storm spotting. Radio and telephone tech-
nologies “proliferated during [the early to mid-twentieth century], providing
innovations that permitted rapid dissemination of warnings based on ongoing tor-
nado events…notably telephone and radio, … an important component of the
spotter network” (Doswell et al.  1999, 545, 547). Emphasis on warning the public

about severe weather evolved in the 1950s. By the 1960s, emphasis was placed on
public watches. More speciﬁcally, following the Palm Sunday tornado outbreak in
1965, “tornado forecasts ofﬁcially became tornado watches,” leading to the cre-
ation of the SKYWARN tornado-preparedness and storm-spotter program
16  Volunteered Geographic Information, Actor-Network Theory…                    295


(Galaway 1985, quoted by Doswell et al.       1999, 547), including storm-spotter
training materials like manuals, booklets, and ﬁlms.
   Related yet different, storm chasing is “the art and science of meeting with a
thunderstorm, for any reason” (Vasquez    2008, 1). It is the tracking andﬁrst-hand

observation of severe weather, oftentimes the tornado being regarded as the primary
target of a chaser. While storm chasing may be a global activity, in the United States,
most of it plays out over the spring and summer months in “Tornado Alley”
(Robertson 1999; Cantillon and Bristow2001 ) . Brooks et a2l0   . 3 ) de ﬁ ne Tornado
Alley using the criteria of tornado frequency and reliability of the season to outline

a region from west Texas that extends northeastward through central Minnesota.
The core probably lies somewhere between north Texas, western Oklahoma, and
western Kansas. This area contains roughly 40% of all US tornado events.
   The idea of storm chasing emerged through scientiﬁc observation and ground
truthing in the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s. Field research, and the idea that the atmo-
sphere is a laboratory, set the stage for multiple humans, using technology, to go

into theﬁeld and literally act as human sensors for observing severe storms and
tornadoes. By 1972, the National Severe Storms Laboratory (NSSL) launched the
Tornado Intercept Project (TIP) and other projects throughout the decade (Golden
and Morgan 1972). Veterans of TIP were involved in the creation of the ﬁrst issue
of Stormtrack, a publication about storm chasing. By 1980, NSSL had developed

TOTO (TOtable Tornado Observatory), an instrument packagedesigned fordeploy-
ment in the direct path of a tornado. This project garnered the focus of a Public
Broadcasting Service (PBS) special on      Novain 1985. The publicity helped to
generate some additional interest in chasing (Vasquez 2008). By 1994 and 1995,
the NSSL’s Veriﬁcation of the Origins of Rotation in Tornadoes Experiment

(VORTEX) had taken off, followed by VORTEX2 in 2009 and 2010, which were
some of the largest storm-intercept research projects to date (National Severe Storms
Laboratory, NSSL 2011 ) .
   Historically, the NWS has relied on volunteer observers to report everyday
weather and also to spot and report severe-weather events throughout the United

States. Multiple technologies have played a major role in the sensing of local
meteorological conditions and the communication of volunteered information
across space. However, this is not solely a story of technology. Technologies like
telephones, television, radar, or barometers do not solely determine the success
of storm-spotting networks. Likewise, human society does not solely determine
the success of networks either. In fact, it is extremely difﬁcult to separate the

technological from the social. ANT is used to describe a storm-reporting human-
sensor network.



   16.3.1       Actors-Intermediaries-Networks


Storm spotters and chasers are a diverse group of individuals. Storm spotters often
work as civil servants or are concerned citizens who observe severe weather because
296                                                      M.H. Palmer and S. Kraushaar


it is their civic duty. They report to law enforcement, emergency managers, and the
NWS. Next are four types of storm chasers. Theﬁrst group can be classiﬁed as
research scientists, graduate or undergraduate students. Some graduate students

in meteorology, from around the world, gain experience and collect data for their
dissertations in theﬁeld through programs like VORTEX and other mesoscale
meteorology research, centered at the Oklahoma Weather Center in Norman,
Oklahoma (Bluestein    1999). Undergraduates from around the United States are
also connected with the VO RTEX program (Palmer et al. 2000 ) . A second group

of storm chasers includes weather entrepreneurs and television reporters who
view severe weather and tornadoes as commodities to beﬁlmed or chased for a
proﬁt. Storm entrepreneurs and reporters post media in online venues for feedback,
discussion, and to spread reputation. A few chasers sell video footage or operate
tornado-chasing tour companies (Kraushaar 2011). Third, some storm chasers are

recognized as nonprofessional scientists who volunteer in scientiﬁc activities such
as the collection of data, analysis, or dissemination of a scientiﬁc project (Haklay
2010). And ﬁnally, a fourth group of storm chasers falls under the category of thrill
seeker. For example, one storm chaser admitted that his goal is “getting up close and
personal with a tornado. The sheer powermother nature can demonstrateis humbling

to say the least” (Kraushaar 2011, 57). Because of thrill seeking, some government
organizations and university research units try to distance themselves from being
associated with storm chasing, even though chasing is very much associated with
the legacy of scientiﬁc mesoscale meteorology. VGI storm reports may be dismissed
due to mistrust based on the view that “science is best left to scientists, and it requires

rigor, knowledge and skills that only professional scientists develop over time”
(Haklay 2010 , 4).
   Meteorologists at the NWS maintain, standardize, and extend the storm-report
network for the media and general public. The NWS is part of a vast bureaucracy

within the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) of the US
Government. Actors within the NWS are relevant and interested because much of
the weather-forecast and weather-warning responsibilities are shouldered by them.
The media, the general public, and industry within the massive severe-weather
warning and emergency-management network rely upon the agency’s issuance

of weather watches and warnings. Operational meteorologists create both short-
and long-term forecasts. Communicator or storm-report specialists work alongside
meteorologists and monitor any storm-report communications coming into their
forecast of ﬁ ce.
   Television media are an actor who warns the general public about severe weather

but also sensationalizes weather as infotainment. Infotainment both informs and is
a form of entertainment. Many television stations employ meteorologists or weath-
ercasters. Reporters often act as storm chasers, guided from the television center
by the station’s meteorologist. Storms are also on the big screen. Scientiﬁc storm
chasing was the inspiration for the infamous 1996 Hollywoodﬁlm         Twister . This

blockbuster served as a launching pad for “temporary chaos” (Vasquez     2008, 5) as
the popularity of storm chasing skyrocketed from the action-packed but distorted
view of storm chasing (Robertson 1999 ) . Subscriptions tSotormtrack magazine
16  Volunteered Geographic Information, Actor-Network Theory…                    297


increased from 350 to more than 900 seemingly overnight, probably inﬂuencing the
rise of the storm-chasing tourism industry. The 1990s also saw home videos of
extreme weather explode in popularity with the media misrepresenting chasing and

romanticizing the activity (Robertson     1999 ) . While manT   ywister enthusiasts
gave up on the activity by 2000, today there is a new saturation from many sources.
The Discovery Channel, for instance, has a reality TV show, Storm Chasers , which
premiered in 2007 and which documents chase teams as they attempt to drive
modiﬁed vehicles into tornadic circulations. With all of this mainstream attention,

storm chasing as a hobby continues to gain in popularity. In the words of a storm
chaser, “Perhaps too many people are looking to make a name for themselves?
I think there are a lot of people chasing now who have not spent years reading
text books and studying basic severe weather meteorology but have been inspired
by Discovery Channel” (Kraushaar 2011 , 68).

   Skills are intermediaries that help deﬁne storm chasers. Some storm spotters
and chasers are educated, holding a math or science degree; others are self-taught
citizen weather observers and scientists. Storm spotters use intermediaries like the
NWS and SKYWARN storm-spotting manuals and materials. Spotters participate
in yearly training at NWS forecast ofﬁces or at county emergency-management

facilities. SKYWARN is an informal educational opportunity that is free of charge
to anyone interested in becoming a spotter (NOAA 2011b). Storm chasers, on the
other hand, often have access to higher-education resources and higher-level NOAA
facilities like the Storm Prediction Center (SPC) and the National Severe Storms
Laboratory (NSSL). However, much meteorological learning, by both storm spot-

ters and chasers, occurs in theﬁeld. Training andﬁeld experiences enhance the
spotter’s and chaser’s credibility with NWS forecasters and atmospheric scientists.
Spotters and chasers are judged by the accuracy of their severe-weather forecasts and
the ability to pinpoint the geographic region(s) most likely to contain a severe-weather

or tornadic event. As a result, chase-day forecasting is a method ofdetermining the
credibility of a storm chaser, by others or through self-awareness. One       chaser
revealed that there “is still a desire to say ‘hey, look what I did…’ And because it’s
a big deal to me to be able to go back and ﬁnd a report that matches what I might have
seen (so to connect the dots on events). But mainly for less than brilliant reasons like

image/self-grati ﬁ cation” (Kraushaa2 r011 , 52).
   All of the actors depend upon technological intermediaries for traveling, remotely
sensing, and reporting storms. Chasers drive their vehicles, equipped with laptop
computers, mobile Internet, mapping software, GPS for accurate road and location
data, digital cameras, and high-deﬁnition (HD) video cameras, to the base of severe

thunderstorms. Positioned, spotters communicate with the media, emergency
managers, law enforcement, or the NWS using cellular phones, handheld communi-
cation radios, or smartphones. Combined with digital technologies, human sensors
emerge in the ﬁeld. For example, some storm chasers, especially the entrepreneurs
and reporters, use webcams to stream chases live over the Internet (Kraushaar

2011 ) . While  some citizen scientists carry intermediaries like “…handheld
anemometers for mea suring wind speeds, or have larger units mounted on their
vehicles. The more research-oriented chasers may travel with mobile mesonets,
298                                                       M.H. Palmer and S. Kraushaar


more elaborate equipment with instruments to collect in-situ weather data, mounted
on their vehicles. Mobile Doppler radar may also be used. Deployable sensor
probes or camera probes may also be employed for either collecting scientiﬁc data

or photos and video inside tornadoes. Having access to the Internet, live radar, real-
time observations, and forecasts makes it very easy for new chasers to head out
into the ﬁeld and intercept a severe storm and tornado” (Kraushaar 2011 , 40–41).
Storm chasers use their instincts, senses, and technologies; they are human sensors.
Chasers are “armed” with laptops and cell phones, but rely heavily upon their “eyes”

and “instincts” to determine conditions and get in good position relative to the storm
(Kraushaar 2011 , 39–40)
   Operational meteorologists, television meteorologists, and weathercasters mon   toir
the atmosphere with the aid of intermediaries like terrestrial weather instruments,
remote-sensing satellites in space, Doppler weather radars, and numerical computer

models. Before calculating any kind of plan of action like the issuance of a severe-
weather watch or warning, the NWS relies upon a network of sensors to make rte    ial-
observations and report back to forecast ofﬁces. Some of the sensors are static and
mechanical, placed in speciﬁc geographic locations, so the origins of each obser  tivoan
including wind speed, direction, barometric pressure, temperature, and rainfall are

known; the sensor’s geographic location is predetermined and stabilized. All meteo-
rologists use photos, videos, websites, and social media to verify their forecasts and
storm warnings. These technologies as intermediaries are not disposable but rather
are part of a sociotechnical network – a way of being in the world.
   Texts (VGI) are important intermediaries that deﬁne the actors. Storm spotters

and chasers author reports and diffuse them through various channels. As stated
earlier, the NWS is interested in receiving reports from people in the ﬁeld regarding
severe weather to aid in the warning decision process. Speciﬁcally, they are inteesrted
in georeferenced information on strong winds, large hail, wall clouds, funnel clouds,

tornadoes, ﬂ ash ﬂ ooding, damage,da    angerous winter weather for radav reri ﬁ cation,
warnings, and decision-making. Spotters, research chasers, entrepreneurs, citizen
scientists, and thrill seekers author reports of tornadoes, wind, hail, storm damage,
and ﬂooding observations (NOAA 2011b). Meteorologists take visual observations
and translate them into text messages that included severe-weather watches and

warnings. These warnings ﬂow to the general public through NOAA weather radio
alerts, the Internet, radio, and television stations. Radio and television media outlets
pass on a vernacular translation of severe-weather alerts through verbal communi-
cation, eye contact with the camera, graphic maps, and messages streaming at the
bottom of television screens, to the general public.

  The amalgamation of actors and intermediaries constructs what might be
described as a human-sensor network. Within such a network there are reciprocal
and symmetrical relationships between society and technology; a symmetry that
blurs the lines between human societies and technologies. Human sensors are
organic in that observations ﬂow from the ﬁeld to centers, while important scientiﬁc

information, meteorological instrument measurements, and Doppl-     erradarre ﬂ ectivity
and velocity information ﬂows from the NWS and television stations to the ﬁeld.
All actors are connected by the intermediaries mentionea  dbove, andall aredependent
16  Volunteered Geographic Information, Actor-Network Theory…                     299


upon one another with regard to early warnings and safety in the ﬁeld. The goals and
objects of the storm-report network are translated by the NWS, who has responsiib  til
for forecasting and the issuance of severe-weather watches and warnings.




   16.3.2       Translations


Meteorologists at the NWS translate goals, objectives, and interests in the storep-ort
network. The goal is to get storm spotters, chasers, and concerned citizens to report
signiﬁcant severe-weather events like tornadoes,ﬂooding, damaging winds, and

hail. The preferred method is to convince spotters and chasers to call in reports
directly to the NWS. This is generally the quickest and easiest way to submit infor-
mation and it facilitates good, two-way communication between thespotters, chasers,
and the NWS communicator or storm-report specialist. Some storm chasers will
call the NWS when they see a tornado or other critical event.
   Next, the NWS would like chasers to submit reports via the Internet on eSpotter,

to the Spotter Network, via Twitter or Facebook, all monitored by the NWS. This is
a more decentralized approach to reporting. Spotters and chasers not only submit
reports to the government. Many in theﬁeld have relationships with different
media agencies to which they will relay their ﬁeld accounts, photos, and video for
rebroadcast. Others have working relationships with local emergency-management

agencies. Some keep their followers on Twitter and Facebook updated with their
chasing status in the ﬁeld. The most prevalent method is use of the Spotter Network.
The Spotter Network “brings storm spotters, storm chasers, coordinators and public
servants together in a network of information. It provides accurate position data of
spotters and chasers for coordination/reporting and provides ground truth to public

servants engaged in the protection of life and property” (Spotter Network      2011 ) .
Launched by AllisonHouse, LLC in 2006, this free service has exploded to an
estimated member base of 15,000 users today. Using a graphical interface on a
computer, people can submit real-time reports based on their speciﬁc location using
GPS coordinates. The Spotter Network also requires chasers to take an exam on
the fundamentals of severe weather before they can join the group. Spotter Network

is a decentralized network and alternative to reporting to the NWS.
   Interest in the storm-reporting network is based onthe ideas of civicduty,heroics,
and participation as scientiﬁc observers in the face of severe-weather threats.
This translation has a militaristic ﬂareit. The NWS encouragesspotters andchasers
to become citizen scientists and act as “the Nation’sﬁrst line of defense against

severe weather” (NOAA2011c ) . Participating in n    tetwork is heroicin thatchasers
will “help meteorologists make lifesaving warning decisions.” Spotters and chasers
as citizen scientiﬁc observers are indispensable in that the NWS cannot do their
job without them in an effort to “keep local communities safe” as the “ﬁrst line of
defense against severe storms” by “giving communities the precious gift of time-

seconds and minutes [that] can help save lives” (NOAA 2011a, b, c, d ) .
300                                                       M.H. Palmer and S. Kraushaar


   The translations put forth by the NWS do not completely converge w  apitrehensive
storm chasers. Some chasers believe it is important to assist the NWS in verifying
and ground truthing severe-weather warnings and Doppler-radas    rignatures. Another
reason to report storms revolves around the potential of material damage or human

casualties. One storm chaser remarked, “I would feel terrible if I didn’t call some-
thing in and someone lost a life in the storm, whether my report would have changed
anything or not, at least I tried” (Kraushaar2011, 48). On the other hand, there is
some apprehension among storm chasers about reporting their        observations and
locations. Storm reporting among a cadre of trained and untrained storm chasers is

political, and many chasers are wary of having their    reports called into question.
Other times, false reports lead to the “cry wolf” ynome, causing the NWS to ques-
tion the credibility of storm reports (Kraushaar 2011 ) . A reverse argument about
the NWS and veriﬁcation is also made by another storm chaser whose perception
is that “The national severe weather database is riddled with imprecise estimates,
reportsﬁltered for veriﬁcation instead of scientiﬁc purposes, and reports of ques-

tionable integrity that are uncorroborated independently. This is a longstanding
problem, one well-documented in several formal papers…Non-tornadic gustnadoes,
dubious ‘brief touchdown/no damage’ reports at night in a forest, and so-called
‘sheriffnadoes’ (scud and other low-hanging features mistaken for tornadoes, often
by poorly-trained law enforcement or other spotters) also may be kept in the system

if they conveniently verify a local NWS warning, whether they really happened or
not, for the sake of better-lookingveri ﬁ catiscores” (Kraushaar 2011 , 69).
   The translations presented by the NWS are only partially convergent. Furthermore,
the NWS has to ﬁlter and act as a gatekeeper of information coming into their center
of calculation.




   16.3.3       The NWS Center of Calculation


In order for the NWS to act at a distance, meteorologists must mobilize, stabilize,
and make storm reports combinable with their technologies and texts. This process
is accomplished at the NWS center of calculation as a means of maintaining
networks by centralizing and standardizing VGI report information that can be
transformed into GIS polygons, radio alerts, and weather bulletin texts that are
consumed by television media and the general public. NWS center of calculation

has been accumulating severe-storm reports for over 60 years (Doswell et al.1999 ) .
But recently, through the advent of enabling geospatial technologies like GPS,
geotagging, georeferencing, and Web 2.0, the spatial resolution of VGI has also
increased.
   The NWS cannot bring the atmosphere into their forecast centers, so they rely

on human sensors to submit bits and pieces of VGI reports to the center. Individual
citizens are in great positions to offer local knowledge and real-time observations
that are not easily remotely sensed. Local knowledge and expertise can replace cen-
tralization in cases where rapid, up-to-date information on local conditions is needed
16  Volunteered Geographic Information, Actor-Network Theory…                       301


(Goodchild 2008). However, the NWS is the ofﬁcial severe-warning organization in
the United States, so for the time being there must be a reciprocal relatsoinp between
decentralized and centralized report and early-warning processes. NWS forecast

ofﬁces are command and control centers equipped with multiple ﬂat-screen televi-
sions that are tuned to local broadcasts. Monitoring the broadcasts not only veriﬁes
that NWS information is being mobilized to the general public, but stations often
use their own reporters as human-sensor storm chasers who stream real-timereports
and most importantly videotape of the atmosphere at a given location.        Reporters

travel in vehicles or even helicopters. Live streaming reports that reveal geographic
location (at the intersection of US 66 and Old School Rd.), estimated      wind speed
(strong inﬂow or outﬂow) and direction (southeasterly vs. northwe    esrtly), how the air
feels to the spotter/reporter (warm, moist, stick y as opposed to cool, dry air), and
the visual veriﬁcation of rotation are extremely important pieces of information to

aid in severe-weather warnings and Doppler-radar ground truthing. NWS meteo-
rologists are not in the ﬁeld, but their auditory and observation skills are put to the
test when monitoring television live feeds.
   As mentioned earlier, phoning in storm reports directly to the NWS is the p   frrred
method of communication. However, digital information is mobilized through

the use of the NWS eSpotter program, NWSChat, Spotter Network, Twitter, and
Facebook (Kraushaar     2011). NWS eSpotter is simply an online reporting system
open the general public. However, individual citizens, companies, or others who are
involved in chasing severe weather do not meet the qualiﬁcations for using NWSChat
( https://nwschat.weather.gov). It is a tightly controlled government communication

system where ofﬁcial talk ﬂows between centers of calculation. Two promising but
very heterogeneous digital landscapes are the social networking sites like Twitter
and Facebook. Twitter and Facebook assist in mobilizing VGI reports and are m    toreni
by communication technicians and meteorological technicians. The Twitterfasle    larch

engine is popular among meteorologists at the center. However, the challenge facing
the technicians is determining what information is useful and what is not – what to
let into the center and what toﬁlter out. Keyword searches and hashtag searches
(#wxreport) for wind, hail, or tornadoes can result in hundreds of tweet returns
that do not always contain relevant information. Messages are often in narrative

form, emotion is expressed, jokes are told, and egos are present. It would serve
communication technicians to become expert text-discourse analysts and decon-
structionists. Barring this, searching content is time consuming and unpredictable.
For example, “Not only would you get relevant tweets about ongoing ﬂooding
or recent hail storms, but you would also get weather reports from all around the

globe and tweets that [have] nothing to do with weather, but included the word hail
or ﬂ ood” (Brice and Pieper  2009, 2). However, the Twitter sources of VGI are poten-
tially too valuable to ignore and can further help the NWS strengthen its position as a
weather authority in an age of increasing privatization. Regardless of how the NWS
center of calculation mobilizes information, they cannot use all of it.

   NWS attempts to stabilize VGI reports through the standardization of reporting
criteria and georeferences. Good reporting must provide detailed observations and
georeferencing at a ﬁne spatial resolution to be useful within the center of calcutian.
302                                                         M.H. Palmer and S. Kraushaar


  Table 16.1 VGI report translation convergence/divergence
 Convergence       Report

Convergent       lon=“−96.3691” lat=“34.3462” I was in a tornado 5:30 pm parked alongside
                    lake thunderbird tree limbs covered my car
Convergent       lon=“−96.1724” lat=“34.2321” Signiﬁcant damage to grocery store in little
                    axe ok. Cars ﬂipped. Cell tower down

Neutral          lon=“0” lat=“0” Chasing today in Southwestern Missouri currently in
                    Branson MO
Neutral          lon=“0” lat=“0” Man I wish I could chase the storm with a classic hook N
                    of Spring ﬁ eld MO
Divergent        lon=“0” lat=“0” Sitting in central OK streaming live video of an approaching
                    severe cell so purchase videos on my homepage




  Table 16.2Spatial resolution of VGI storm reports
 Spatial resolution          VGI                                              Usefulness
Lat. and long. coordinates lon=−96.3691 lat=34.3462                        Excellent

Road intersections         Forum Rd. and Chapel Hill Rd., Columbia, MO     Excellent/good
 Place-names                Columbia, MO                                      Good/fair
 Regions                    Boone County, MO                                  Fair

 No georeference             N/A                                              Poor



For example, the NWS would like Twitter users to report “Damage from winds –
brieﬂy describing the damage; hail – including size of the hail; tornadoes and funnel

clouds; andﬂooding” (NOAA          2011d). Reports containing the most convergent
VGI translations in descending order include reports of occurrences (hail, tornado,
etc.), reports of damage, relay of NWS information by spotters, personal opinions,

and spotter, chaser, and media advertisements (see Table 16.1). Georeferences with
ﬁne spatial resolution are equally important to the center. Information about hail,

extreme winds, ﬂooding, and tornadoes must be located as accurately as possible
in space. In descending order, the NWS center of calculation prefers latitude and
longitude coordinates and road intersections over place-names, regions (counties

or physiographic regions like “the Ozarks”), or no georeferences (see Table 16.2 ).
When storm spotters, chasers, and citizens conform to the reporting criteria and
lat/long coordinates through GPS or geotagging, the convergence between the

decentralized network and the center of calculation is perfectly translated. Center
communication specialists ﬁlter out less convergent reports.
   The most accurate, ﬁne-resolution georeferencing reports can be combined with

Doppler-radar data to verify severe-weather warnings and with text products to be
diffused publicly. NWS meteorologists translate their ability to precisely forecast

storms, generate mesoscale numerical-model representations, simulate storm move-
ments, and calculate the trajectories of severe storms and mesocyclones. Storm
reports aid in ground truthing and verifying the accuracy of these products. Further

connections are made between theﬁeld and the center as the NWS integrates
Doppler-radar data into GIS-based warnings known as storm-based warnings.
16   Volunteered Geographic Information, Actor-Network Theory…                    303


Precise VGI reports are preferred when verifying the NWS polygon warning system
called WARNGEN, a state-of-the-art Doppler-radar interface combined with
geographic information systems (GIS). Individual storm reports are geotagged
onto maps showing Doppler reﬂectivity, velocities, and the polygon warning area.

The WARNGEN technology interface, implemented nationally, allows meteorogliosts
to digitize localized polygons as a representation of a severe-thunderstorm- orntodro-
warned area. Warnings are usually more accurate for areas where the spatial restoiolun
is ﬁner than county-wide warnings. The combination of VGI reports, Doppler-radar
data, and geospatial technologies transforms the way that meteorologists monitor,

represent, and issue severe-weather warnings. Local and particular information will
become more important to the center of calculation as the severe-weather warnings
become more precise.
   Ultimately, the NWS center of calculation acts at a distance (Latour    1987 ) and
extends its networks further by relaying transformed reports to the media.All relevant
storm reports and the simulated worlds are at the ﬁngertips of the meteorologists

at the center. Through the integration of reports, criteria, and GIS, the center of
calculation can generate text bulletins that exit the center and diffuse externally to
the media and general public. As human sensors in the ﬁeld provide severe-weather
observations to the NWS, the information is transformed through the above-m    tioned
centering process, and the spotters/chasers/informants become invisible. The NWS

center of calculation has that power because it is responsible for issuing many
comprehensive forecast products to a wide audience, including the general public,
at only a modest cost to taxpayers. Aviation, ﬁre, weather, hydrologic, marine, trcal,i
climate, and public forecasts are created. The NWS produces event-driven, sho   rrt-ge
products for alerting the public to all types of hazardous weather. These products

include outlooks, watches, warnings, advisories, and special weather statements.
The products allow the NWS to do work and have impacts on other dispersed spaces –
as long as the networks remain stable and in place (Murdoch 2006 ) .



   16.4       Summary and Conclusions


In this chapter, we have demonstrated the utility of an ANT framework in the
description of sociotechnical networks in the context of a volunteered geographic
information system. Key concepts used here included actors, intermediaries, net-

works, translations, and centers of calculation. The dichotomy between humans
and technology is a false one. Rather, humans and technologies are interconnected
through actors and intermediaries that form networks. We have introduced readers
to a storm-spotting and storm-chasing actor-network. All of the actors and interme-
diaries resemble an amalgamation of human sensors, not just isolated humansrcyairng

external sensors. Mobile phones, concerned  dialogues, observantpeople, digitalvideo
cameras, television speakers, and the Internet are the voice, eyes, and ears of the
human sensors. All of the human sensors are decentralized and in a state of play
with one another. The NWS, a centralizing force, monitors the airwaves, chatrooms,
 304                                                         M.H. Palmer and S. Kraushaar

 social networking sites, and televisions for translatable VGI severe-storm reports.

 NWS meteorologists do not have the luxury of free play. They are responsible, as
 ofﬁcials, for warning the public about hazardous weather conditions. Meteorologists
 within the center of calculation receive, mine, and harvest raw VGI and transform

 it into a standardized severe-weather bulletin that can be conﬁdently consumed bty    he
 media and the general public.
    ANT is a conceptual framework, set of methods, and an ecological approach for

 understanding VGI. Through the lens of ANT, a general symmetry or reciprocity
 between humans and technologies stands at the forefront of an ecological theory.
 General symmetry between human and nonhuman actorscan contributeideas forthe
 development of the human-sensor concept. As such, the human sensor isconceptua-

 lized as a “whole” network of interconnections and potential disconnections, a very
 dynamic organism. At the same time, ANT’s method of tracing text, tech nologies,
 humans, and money can provide us withinsights into the human sensors       ’ motivations

 for volunteering geographic information, and issues pertaining to the quality of
 geographic data generated. Some storm spottersand chasers arepreferred informants
 for the NWS. What conditions lead to this preferential treatment? What are the

 successful translations that lead to such a network? Are the network relations
 reciprocal? Finally, we believe that actor-networks could be categorized as environ-
 ments. The storm spotting/chasing VGI environment is prescriptive, informal, and
 decentralized. One measure of success for the storm-report network is signiﬁcant

 weather-event content and precise georeferencing. But how might we describe a
 Flickr VGI environment? In Flickr, the georeferencing information may be very
 precise (lat/long coordinates). Yet, what can we learn from the photographs and

 their content? Environments containing heterogeneous content may require ustth      oink
 about “interpretive attributes” through the tracing and decoding of intermediaries.




     References


 Bates, F. C. (1962). Severe local storm forecasts and warnings and the general public. Bulletin of
    the American Meteorological Society, 43 , 288–291.
Bingham, N. (1996). Object-ions: From technological determinisms towards geographies of
    relations. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space, 14 , 635–658.
 Bishr, M., & Mantelas, L. (2008). A trust and reputation model for ﬁltering and classiﬁcation of
    knowledge about urban growth. GeoJournal, 72 , 229–237.

  Bluestein, H. B. (1999). A history of severe-storm-intercept ﬁeldWe.ather and Forecasting,
    14 , 558–577.
 Brice, T., & Pieper, C. (2009). Using Twitter to receive storm reports. Available online at:
    com/ams/pdfpapers/163543.pdf . Accessed 18 Feb2012.
Brooks, H., Doswell, C., III, & Kay, M. (2003). Climatological estimates of local daily tornado
    probability for the United States. Weather and Forecasting, 18 (4), 626–640.
 Burgess, J., Clark, J., & Harrison, C. M. (2000). Knowledges in action: An actor network analysis
    of a wetland agri-environment scheme. Ecological Economics, 35 (1), 119–132.
 Callon, M. (1991). Techno-economic networks and irreversibility. In J. Law (Ed.), A sociology of
    monsters (pp. 132–161). New York: Routledge.
   16   Volunteered Geographic Information, Actor-Network Theory…                                 305


   Callon, M. (1999). Actor-network theory: The market test. In J. Law & J. Hassard (Eds.),     Actor

       network and after (pp. 181–195). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
   Cantillon, H., & Bristow, R. (2001). Tornado chasing: An introduction to risk tourism opportunities.
       InProceedings of the 2000 Northeastern Recreation Research Symposiu(p   mp. 234–239). Newtown
       Square: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Northeastern Research Station.

     Crampton, J. (2010M   ).apping: A critical introduction to cartography and GIS     . New York:
       Blackwell.
   Davies, G. (2000). Narrating the natural history unit: Institutional ordering and spatial strategies.
       Geoforum, 31 (4), 539–551.

Deleuze, G., & Guattari, F. (1987).         A thousand plateaus: Capitalism and schizophrenia         .
       Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
   Doswell, C. A., III, Moller, A. R., & Brooks, H. E. (1999). Storm spotting and public awareness
       since the ﬁrst tornado forecasts of 1948. Weather and Forecasting, 14 , 544–557.

  Galaway, J. G. (1985). J. P. Finley: Theﬁrst severe storms forecaster (Part 1).      Bulletin of the
       American Meteorological Society, 66 , 1389–1395.
   Gartner, G., Bennett, D., & Morita, T. (2007). Toward ubiquitous cartography.    Cartography and
       Geographic Information Science, 34 , 247–257.

   Golden, J. H., & Morgan, B. J. (1972). The NSSL/Notre Dame tornado intercept program, spring
       1972. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society, 53 , 1178–1180.
   Goodchild, M. F. (2007a). Citizens as sensors: The world of volunteered geography. GeoJournal,
       69 , 211–221.

   Goodchild, M. F. (2007b). Citizens as voluntary sensors: Spatial data infrastructures in the world
       of Web 2.0. International Journal of Spatial Data Infrastructure Research, 2 , 24–32.
   Goodchild, M. F. (2008). Commentary: Whither VGI? GeoJournal, 72 , 239–244.
   Haklay, M. (2010, Sept). Geographical citizen science – Clash of cultures and new opportunities.

       In Proceedings of the workshop on the role ofvolunteered geographic information inadvancing
       science. GIScience 2010, Zurich, Switzerland.
   Haraway, D. (1987). A manifesto for cyborgs: Science, technology, and socialist feminism in the
       1980s. Australian Feminist Studies, 2 (4), 1–42.

   Harris, C. (2004). How did colonialism dispossess? Comments from an edge of empire.Annals of
       the Association of American Geographers, 94 (1), 165–182.
   Harvey, F. (2001). Constructing GIS: Actor networks of collaboration U.RISA Journal, 13(1), 29–37.
   Harvey, F. (2007, April). Nowhere is everywhere? Towards postmodernist ubiquitous computing

       based geographic communication. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Association of
       American Geographers, San Francisco, CA.
  Harvey, F., & Chrisman, N. (2004). The imbrication of geography and technology: The social
       construction of geographic information systems. In S. D. Brunn, S. L. Cutter, & J. W. Harrington

       (Eds.), Geography and technology (pp. 65–80). Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic.
  Hinchliffe, S. (1996). Technology, power, and space-the means and ends of geographies of
       technology. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space, 14 , 659–682.
   Hitchings, R. (2003). People, plants and performance: On actor network theory and the material

       pleasures of the private garden. Social and Cultural Geography, 4 (1), 99–113.
  Kirsch, S. (2002). John Wesley Powell and the mapping of the Colorado Plateau, 1869–1879:
       Survey science, geographic solutions, and the economy of environmental values.Annals of the
       Association of American Geographers, 93 (4), 645–661.

  Kirsch, S., & Mitchell, D. (2004). The nature of things: Dead labor, nonhuman actors, and the
       persistence of Marxism. Antipode, 36 (4), 687–705.
     Kraushaar, S. (2011G  ).round truth: Volunteered geographic information and storm chasing        .
       Unpublished master’s thesis, University of Missouri, Columbia.

     Latour, B. (1987S)c.ience in action: How to follow scientists and engineers through society      .
       Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
     Latour, B. (2005R)e .assembling the social: An introduction to actor-network-theory     . Oxford:
       Oxford University Press.
   Law, J., & Hassard, J. (1999). Actor network theory and after. New York: Blackwell.
  306                                                              M.H. Palmer and S. Kraushaar


Martin, E. (2000). Actor-networks and implementation: Examples from conservation GIS in

      Ecuador. International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 14 (8), 715–738.
  Mummidi, L., & Krumm, J. (2008). Discovering points of interest from users’ map annotations.
      GeoJournal, 72 , 215–227.
  Murdoch, J. (1995). Actor-networks and the evolution of economic forms: Combining description

      and explanation in theories of regulation, ﬂexible specialization, and networks.Environment
      and Planning A, 27 , 731–757.
    Murdoch, J. (1997a). Inhuman/non-human: Actoorr-k   neteory and the prospectsfor anon-dualistic
      and symmetrical perspective on nature and society. Environment and Planning D: Society and

      Space, 15 , 731–756.
 Murdoch, J. (1997b). Towards a geography of heterogeneous associations.      Progress in Human
      Geography, 21 , 321–337.
    Murdoch, J. (2006 P)o.ststructuralist geography: A guide to relational space. London: Sage.

 National Severe Storms Laboratory (NSSL). (2011).       VORTEX2 background .     http://www.nssl.
      noaa.gov/projects/vortex2/background.php  . Accessed 12 Apr 2011.
  NOAA. (2011a). What is skywarn?     http://www.nws.noaa.gov/skywarn/. Accessed 20 Nov 2011.
    NOAA. (2011b). Weather spotter’s ﬁ eld. guidetp://www.nws.noaa.gov/om/brochureS  s/GJune6–11.

      pdf. Accessed 20 Nov 2011.
  NOAA. (2011c). America’s weather enterprise: Protecting lives, livelihoods, and your way of life.
      http://www.weather.gov/om/brochures/Citizen_Scientist.pdf. Accessed 11 June 2011.
    NOAA. (2011d). Skywarn Storm Spotters.            http://www.arrl.org/ ﬁ les/ ﬁ le/Media%20&%20PR/

      EmergencyRadio_org/Skywarn.pdf . Accessed 15 June 2011.
  Palmer, M. (2009). Engaging with indigital geographic information networks.Futures, 41, 33–40.
Palmer, M. (2012). Cartographic encounters at the BIA GIS center of calculation.        American
      Indian Culture and Research Journal, (forthcoming).

  Palmer, M. H., Stevenson, S., & Zaras, D. S. (2000, Jan).  Student evaluations of the Oklahoma
      Weather Center REU Program: 1995, 1998, and 1999. Ninth symposium on education, Long
      Beach, CA. American Meteorological Society, pp. 24–27.
Panelli, R. (2010). More-than-human social geographies: Posthuman and other possibilities.

      Progress in Human Geography, 34 (1), 79–87.
  Robertson, D. (1999). Beyond twister: A geography of recreational storm chasing on the southern
      plains. Geographical Review, 89 (4), 533–553.
  Smith, R. G. (2003). World city actor-networks. Progress in Human Geography, 27 (1), 25–44.

    Spotter Network. (2011).http://www.spotternetwork.org. Accessed 15 Apr 2011.
    Thrift, N. J. (199S6p. tial formations. London: Sage.
 Thrift, N. J. (2000). Actor-network theory. In R. J. Johnson, D. Gregory, G. Pratt, & M. Watts
      (Eds.), Dictionary of human geography (pp. 4–6). Oxford: Blackwell.

    Vasquez, T. (2008 S). rm chasing handbook (2nd ed.). Garland: Weather Graphics Technologies.
  Williams, S. (2007). Application for GIS specialist meeting. http://www.ncgia.ucsb.edu/projects/
      vgi/participants.html Accessed 6 Sept 2010.
 Zook, M., & Graham, M. (2007a). The creative reconstruction of the internet: Google and the

      privatization of cyberspace and DigiPlace. Geoforum, 38 , 1322–1343.
  Zook, M., & Graham, M. (2007b). Mapping DigiPlace: Geocoded internet data and the representa-
      tion of place. Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design, 34 , 466–482.
   Chapter 17

VGI as a Compilation Tool for Navigation

Map Databases


    Michael W. Dobson









 Abstract Volunteered geographic information, a crowdsourced approach to geting
geographic information, is being used in numerous map database compilation sys-
tems. Active and passive contribution systems exist, but it is the active systems,
through which contributors can provide their personal local knowledge, that hold

the greatest promise for improving the quality of spatial databases used for naviga-
tion and location-based services. Both open and hybrid map compilation systems
have been developed in an attempt to beneﬁt from VGI. We discuss the nature, limi-
tations, and advantages of a range of crowdsourced compilation systems in an
attempt to evaluate the inﬂuence of VGI in helping to improve various aspects of

data quality.



    17.1     Introduction


The quest for improved data quality in spatial databases used for mapping and
navigation remains a challenging objective. Map, point of interest (POI), anseiss
listings databases often fail to meet the quality standards mandated by their users.

Data quality problems in these databases fall into categories that can be identiﬁed
as completeness, logical consistency, positional accuracy, temporal accuracy, and
thematic accuracy (International Organization for Standardization, ISO 2002 ) .
   It is clear that most data-quality problems in spatial databases result from
compilation processes used to collect and maintain their content. Although the

tools, techniques, and theory of map compilation have advanced in recent years,
we have replaced older method-induced errorswith other errors relatedto new meth-
ods, such as database synchronization, conﬂation, and overreliance on sophisticated


  M. W. Dob  so) (
   TeleMapics LLC , Laguna Hills, CA , USA
e-mail: mwdobson@telemapics.com


D. Sui et al. (eds.), Crowdsourcing Geographic Knowledge: Volunteered Geographic
Information (VGI) in Theory and Practice, DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-4587-2_17,
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
308                                                                      M.W. Dobson















 Fig. 17.1The amount of data that may need to be collected to produce modern, navigable map
databases is staggering. Current coverage demands are stressing our ability to collect these data in
a manner that enhances data quality (Image courtesy of TeleMapics LLC)


software systems whose use often confounds issues of logical consistency. However,
one critical, recurring weakness in compilation systems used to collect, categorize,d
prepare spatial data for use lies in our inability to leverage local spatial knowledge

to the advantage of data quality.
   Compilation efforts related to spatial data used for mapping, navigation, and
location services have always suffered from the lack of resources that can be acllaoted
to collecting, curating, and organizing these data. Numerous categories of data are
collected, and each of these requires detailed collection strategies to produce an

accurate, comprehensive, and up-to-date database (Fig.      17.1). See Chap.   14 by
Coleman 2  (012) in this book for a comprehensive evaluation of VGI and its use in
conventional topographic base-mapping programs. While most feature categories
have been standardized (see, e.g., geographic dataﬁle (GDF) now ISO14825:

ISO 2004), unique categories of data may be requested by licensed customers or, in
some cases, by inﬂuential user groups.
   As major online companies such as Google and Microsoft, as well as the proveirds
of navigation map databases such as NAVTEQ and TomTom (formerly Tele Atlas),
attempt to extend their mapping products to include world coverage, the problem

of allocating resources to collect the required data will become untenable. It is pes,i
however, that this problem can beneﬁ t from the tactical useof volunteeredgeographic
information that involves the gatheringof spatial information througha formof mass
collaboration commonly known as crowdsourcing and sometimes referred to as
Wikinomics (Tapscott and Williams     2008) or VGI (Goodchild 2007 ) .




   17.2       VGI in Respect to Map Database Compilation


Crowdsourcing is an architecture of participation that is based on volunteering,
sharing (social networking), cooperation, and collective action. Some of its beneﬁts
are that it does not require coordinated management, an operational budget, an
17   VGI as a Compilation Tool for Navigation Map Databases                        309


overarching business structure, or that its data be prepared in respect to speciﬁc
use cases. Crowdsourcing attempts to leveragethe wisdom of crowds throughthe use

of software applications that help to self-synchronize otherwise latent groups to
accomplish previously unattainable objectives.    1Note that many people are inter-
ested in maps and consider themselves casual geographers or cartographers and
have the desire to contribute data that could be used to improve the data quality of

map databases. Before the Internet and the associated development of software to
self-synchronize communities with similar interests, these potential map editors
did not have access to systems that allowed them to contribute to map databases in a
direct and satisfactory manner.

   VGI is aboutﬁnding ways to discover, incentivize, elicit, and use information
that online communities interested in maps and mapping possess about local
geographical space. Our interest here is in crowdsourcing, focused on the collection
of spatial data to augment, update, or extend map databases. It is a process that

allows those interested in improving the quality of maps to contribute data or edit
maps based on their knowledge of localcircumstances. What is importanthere isthat
the applications provide contributors with access to a database and accept comm   nuity
edits to that database but do not require signiﬁcant training in map or data comptiiloan

to become a contributor to these systems (Heipke 2010 ) .



   17.2.1       How Is Crowdsourcing Applied to Map Compilation?


Current practice involves two types of crowdsourcing for map compilation
purposes. These processes are categorized as passive community input and active
community input.



   17.2.1.1    Passive Community Input


Passive community input involves the use of probe data automatically gathered
from user devices, such as GPS receivers or similar location technology, used to
record the path of users (or their vehicle) during their daily journeys. This “probe”
or “ﬂoating point data” records the geometry of the user’s path, elevation, and speed

of movement. These recordings can be a very practical method of measuring trafﬁc,
as well as vehicle-based congestion. Other data, such as speed limit, signal and stop
sign location, and turn restrictions, can be inferred from interrogating the path and
behavior of the probe as it moves between origin and destination.

   These passive data are normally collected on an anonymous basis, and the com-
panies collecting these data often, but not always, require the users to agree to


 1
 See Surowiecki (2005) for an impressive essay on the “Wisdom of Crowds” and Shirky2(008 ) for
a fascinating discussion of the crowd and its self-synchronization.
310                                                                      M.W. Dobson


have their probe data collected. In addition, some companies take additional steps
to assure conﬁdentiality, such as dropping the ﬁrst and last 2 min of the path over
concerns related to identifying residences, work location, or other destinations that

might reveal details related to an individual’s identity.
   Overall, the passive contributions have provided data in volumes previously
unavailable in map compilation efforts. For example, users agreeing to participate
in TomTom’s Map Share tracking program contributed over twotrillion GPS points
within the ﬁrst 2 years the program was in existence. Currently, TomTom collects

over three billion new measurements each day (TomTom           2011 ) . According to
TomTom representatives, aggregating this massive number of data points        helped
them average out data collection errors and enhance their navigation database with
an extremely high level of positional accuracy (Dobson2010a ) . A further advantage
of passive community data is that it rarely contains “data spam” that is purposefully

contributed to crowdsourced systems as a method of degrading the usefulness of the
database. What little data spam enters the system through passive contributions can
usually be discovered through algorithms tuned to discover, compare, and evaluate
logical inconsistencies in the contributed data.
   Passive community input, however, is effectively blind to many of the attributes

whose collection is a required part of the map compilation process. Attributes such
as street names, route numbers, addresses, dividers,water features, pointsof interest,
and various types of boundaries cannot be discovered through the collection of passive
probe data. Instead, the collection of these types of data attributes beneﬁts from the
use of active community input.



  17.2.1.2     Active Community Input


Those who actively contribute are the primary source of detailed local knowledge
in crowdsourced map compilation systems, and these inputs potentially provide
a signiﬁcant source of improvement to data quality in these types of systems
(Heipke 2010). In theory, the process of evoking active community input relies on
the goodwill of a user who decides to directly contribute compilation information

by using an online system to submit edits or map data that might resolve a mapping
problem experienced by them while using these data in a local area. The chapter by
Harvey 2 (012) in this book raises important questions about potential biases in these
data related to the form of the agreement under which these data are contributed.
   In some active systems, the contributors may lack the relevant local knowledge

to resolve the issue and instead digitize the geometry of streets and roads in these
areas referencing satellite imagery. The assumption is that local users will later add
the attributes to these digitized strings that are necessary to ﬂesh out the database.
Contributors who digitize streets provide labor, but do not contribute the attribute
data that converts a maze of lines into a functional map database. Unfortunately,

crowdsourced compilation systems depend on the success with which they can
attract contributors who are able and willing to provide data or edits based on their
personal local knowledge of an area, rather than those contributors providing labor
in the form of digitizing services.
17  VGI as a Compilation Tool for Navigation Map Databases                        311


   There are at least two types of active contributed observations of interest for map
compilation: “direct” and “indirect.” For the purpose of crowdsourced systems used
for map compilation, direct observation means that the person contributing local
knowledge about a place is either at the location at the time of the contribution;

has visited the location in order to gather notes,photos, and data forthe contribution;
or has past familiarity with that location (i.e., in the past, has worked there, lived
there, or frequented the area for some purpose and created a contribution based
on this memory). Indirect observation relies on the analysis of imagery and other
sensed location data to extract road and related attribute data for purposes of creat-

ing or updating map compilations. This is a “shallow” task that requires little or no
local knowledge to complete and may be error prone due to lack of on-the-ground
familiarity with local geography.
   In general, observations made by persons presently or recently at the location for
which they are contributing map data are more likely to be accurate than observa-
tions contributed by those who have familiarity with an area but are relying on

memory. Similarly, it is generally true that a person who is at the location for which
he or she is contributing data is more likely to provide higher-accuracy input than
someone who is relying on memory supplemented by satellite or aerial imagery of
the location. A person who is not at the location but viewing “street-side” imagery
(such as that provided by Google, NAVTEQ, or Earthmine) might be able to use this

type of imagery and attribute data derived from the imagery to provide higher-accuracy
updates than a person actually at the location. The accuracy of imagery-based inputs
would depend on the skill of the analyst and the quality, comprehensiveness,
and capture date of the imagery and associated sensor output for the location being
interrogated. Given the capabilities of current compilation systems, capturing the

details of local information through contributions from users who have direct and
recent personal local knowledge of these areas may be a preferred method that is
accurate in respect to position, currency, and theme.



   17.3       Types of Crowdsourced Systems with Active
         Contributions


Active crowdsourcing is most often used in open and hybrid compilation systems.
Open systems used for map compilation are nonproprietary and trust their users to

contribute the types of spatial data they desire, as well as to edit their works or the
works of others without restriction. In addition, open systems make their data freely
available for use, with certain restrictions on derived works that the community
feels are required to preserve the integrity and value of the parent database. On the
other hand, hybrid systems, except for those employed by some government agen-

cies, are generally proprietary, allow their crowdsourcing system to funnel edits
and contributions only for limited types of data, claim rights of ownership in and
to the data, and contractually restrict most uses of their databases. In addition and
most importantly for this discussion, hybrid compilation systems often ingest
crowdsourced edits but include further rigorous analysis before these inputs are
312                                                                       M.W. Dobson


committed to the database. Hybrid compilation systems are so named because
they mix crowdsourcing with traditional compilation techniques that may include
other data sources (both licensed and unlicensed), as well as the use of ﬁeld survey

vehicles equipped with leading-edge technology capable of capturing road and
street data and its attributes with extreme levels of accuracy.
   An open map database compilation system, such as OpenStreetMap (OSM),
accepts all contributions by its users, pushing the edits in an unchanged and uneval-
uated state to the live instance of their database. Those who contribute data edits

to open systems are regarded as trusted, and their input is readily accepted for
publishing, although it is subject to future revision by other members of the crowd.
This behavioral approach is based on the assumption that more local eyes help
reveal map edits or augmentations that are considered spam, erroneous, incomplete,
or unsatisfactory to other users for some reason. Open crowdsourced databases

are considered to be self-healing over time. The speed with which the changes can
be published and evaluated by other participants is critical for potentially increasing
the data quality resulting from crowdsourced compilation. New edits can be reviewed
and edited by others, or a previous instance of the data for the location in question
can be reinstated if the posted corrections are rejected during communal evaluation.

For example, MapQuest, in its use of OSM data for some of its online navigation
websites, publishes speciﬁc types of updates, originally made to the master OSM
database, to its local instance of the database, in a matter of minutes. More complex
types of data may require additional processing by MapQuest (e.g., those related to
routing attributes) but are usually posted in less than a day, allowing for immediate

review by others in the community (Dobson 2010b ) .
   Hybrid systems mix crowdsourcing with traditional map database compilation
techniques. The operational difference is that the contributions from crowdsourcing
may be used only as indicators of change and signal the system management

module that further research needs to be undertaken. Public contributors to these
systems may not be regarded as trusted but merely considered as another valuable
source of data. These data are then researched further before being accepted and
pushed to a live database which has passed the quality-assurance procedures required
for distribution.

   For example, the Swiss Federal Ofﬁce of Topography (swisstopo) has integrated
the concept of crowdsourcing into their system of national databases known as
the topographic landscape model and digital cartographic model (Guélat         2009 ) .
Swisstopo appears to have taken the view that crowdsourcing provides a new source
of content for upgrading their national databases, aswell as the possibilityof opening

a new form of relationships with their customers. Their system allows the uploading
of GPS tracks, attachments, notiﬁcations of errors, surfaces, and lines. This crowd-
sourced input is channeled through an intranet connected with a central revision
layer whose dispatcher distributes the comments to the appropriate databases.
The crowdsourced data is considered to be a source of change detection that may or

may not require ﬁeld investigation before acceptance into the national databases.
   In the commercial arena, Google, through its Google Maps platform, is the
leading user of a hybrid compilation that features active crowdsourcing. Google’s
initial online mapping effort, an attempt to support its local advertising business,
17  VGI as a Compilation Tool for Navigation Map Databases                          313


was based on navigable map databases the company licensed from NAVTEQ and
Tele Atlas, as well as a number of minor suppliers. In part, the transformation of

Google to a map compiler rather than licensor was related to its concern that the
commercial databases it licensed did not, in all cases, meet the company’s need for
accuracy or coverage, nor were they up-to-date . 2
   Google was an early adopter of crowdsourcingG    . oogle Map Maker was developed

to help the company provide map data in countries where its map suppliers were
unable to provide coverage. The Map Maker application allowed registered users
to create and update maps of areas of personal interest to them. Google’s agreement
with its users gives the company a license in and to the data that its users create.

The company then upgraded the maps originally created in Map Maker with tradi-
tional map compilation technology to create its own, proprietary map base. Google
quality-engineered the data contributions of their users (by updating them with
ﬁne-resolution imagery), conﬂated the data with that from authoritative geographic

data sources, tested the transportation networks onthe map for connectivity,and then
published the results in Google Maps, its corporate map franchise for consumer use.
   In 2009 Google replaced the map data for the United States and Canada
from NAVTEQ and Tele Atlas with coverage compiled and created by Google.

The majority of these data have been created by Google in a traditional compila-
tion process and not through crowdsourcing. Google has strategically added a
“report a problem” button on the bottom of Google Maps that allows users to sug-
gest changes for Google Maps and also to use Google Map Maker as a tool for
contributing edits on a limited number of data types for which the company desires

crowdsourced input.
   TomTom (formerly Tele Atlas) has achieved considerable success in crowdsoiu      nrc
through its use of the Map Share program that has become an integral part of the
TomTom personal navigation device (PND) experience. However, TomTom has

chosen to focus on its collection of passive probe data at the expense of actively
contributed data, possibly due to ﬁnancial issues (Dobson 2010a ) .
   Before its 2008 acquisition by TomTom, Tele Atlas compiled their database
using traditional tools. Their compilation efforts surveyed information from over

50,000 data resources including aerial photos, tax data, government partners, utility,
ﬂeet and postal drivers, strategic partners, proprietary Web crawlers, their ﬂeet
of mobile survey vehicles, and end-users (Dobson 2007). Tele Atlas used a two-
pronged approach to creating their database. They compiled what they could from

other sources and drove streets androads (mainly using sophisticated,mobile sensing
platforms) to verify information that cannotbe provided throughsource compilation.
Their belief at the time was that they needed to mix ﬁeldwork with other standard
compilation techniques to create the data needed for a navigation-quality database.

At that time, the company was receiving only 600 customer error correction forms
a week (using an online input gathering tool), but the time it took to research,
conﬁrm, and edit the reports was 45 days (Dobson 2007 ) . The post-acquisition use


 During his keynote address at Interactive Local Media (ILM) 2007, John Hanke, director, Google
Earth and Maps for Google, while discussing the quality ofthe data provided byGoogle’smap data
suppliers, looked up at the audience and said, “You have no idea how bad these data are.”
314                                                                      M.W. Dobson


of Map Share dramatically increased the number of active community inputs yet
helped to decrease the time required to research active edits signiﬁcantly since each
was transmitted in a controlled format, tagged with a GPS coordinate, and displayed

on a map image of the area recorded at the time the user touched the screen of the
TomTom GPS to initiate the error correction process.
   NAVTEQ, similar to TomTom, has been very successful in collecting sources for
its inventory of probe data from its man partners in the transportationand navigation

markets. It will likely beneﬁt from additional probe data through the various map
programs residing on many Nokia phones. Conversely, NAVTEQ has been less
successful in the area of active crowdsourcing, as it collects insigniﬁcant numbers
of contributions through its online Map Reporter interface and currently lacks an

alternative, popular, customer-facing interface that could be used to attract active
crowdsourced map data.
   It is important to note that Google, NAVTEQ, and TomTom limit the types of
edits that their users are allowed to contribute. As opposed to Google, NAVTEQ
and TomTom tend to use active community data as measures of change detection.

In essence, receipt of an edit sparks research into the accuracy of the edit, and a
positive evaluation, at this stage, initiates a search for an authoritative or trusted
source that could validate the change information 3. In the rare case that the situation
cannot be conﬁrmed by data mining, the location is queued for examination by a

ﬁeld representative or a ﬁeldvehicle during other research inthe area. The distinction
in method is important, as NAVTEQ’s and TomTom’s customers regard the data
these companies license as authoritative and able to meet the speciﬁcations required
by their applications. While TomTom and NAVTEQ have embraced crowdsourcing,
they have not embraced the integrity of the crowd, preferring instead to evaluate the

data on their terms, although this practice does not impugn the potential reliability
of active crowdsourced data.
   Crowdsourcing, in its various guises, has been embraced by major and minor
players in the world of mapping, who desire to compile quality map databases. It is

unlikely that these implementations of crowdsourcing have been embraced without
considerable evaluation, but is the application of crowdsourcing/VGI a panacea that
will ﬁnally bring us improved map quality?



   17.4      Does Crowdsourced Map Compilation Work
        as Advertised?


 Suroweicki 2(005) indicated that “wise crowds” possess diversity of opinion, inde-
pendence, decentralization, and aggregation (i.e., they have found a method that

allows them to collaborate). When these characteristics exist, the crowd’s judgment,
according to Suroweicki, is likely to be accurate.or example, althougheach person’s


 See David Stage (2009) for an interesting distinction between “authoritative” and “trusted” data
sources. Stage considers those who collect and distribute authoritative data to be trusted.
17  VGI as a Compilation Tool for Navigation Map Databases                        315


evaluation of speciﬁc map data is likely to contain both information and error, group
evaluation of contributed map edits (aggregation) in crowdsourced systems is
thought to reduce error and to create a map database that over time should become

more accurate. Attaining this goal depends on the diversity ofopinion, independence,
and decentralization in the crowdsourcing population, as well as the inﬂuence of
the method used for soliciting the contributions. In essence, if the crowd cannot
satisfy these conditions, its judgments are unlikely to be accurate. These general

rules for the efﬁcacy of crowdsourcing are useful for evaluating best practices
related to whether crowdsourcing systems are unbiased and likely to be successful
in meeting the goals set for them by the contributors. However, directional measures
such as these do not really assess how accurate or erroneous crowdsourced systems

might be in respect to speciﬁc uses of these data.
   Some have suggested detailed methods for analyzing these data. For example,
the spatial data quality indicators recommended by Van Exel et al.(     2010 ) would
focus on user quality, feature quality, and their interdependence as a method of
evaluating crowd quality in crowdsourced map compilation activities. Their initial

recommendations for using local knowledge, experience, and recognition to evalu-
ate user quality will be very difﬁcult to quantify in any meaningful sense. In addi-
tion, their approach to “feature quality” involves measures of lineage, positional
accuracy, and semantic accuracy, although the authors admit these elements are “…
                                                  4
not considered consistent for crowdsourced data .”
   Conversely, efforts at approaching the accuracy of crowdsourced systems through
measures of ﬁtness of use are ill advised. Deﬁning use for real-world applications
is a complex and error-prone process that is often invalidated by the lack of under-
standing of the legal andﬁnancial ramiﬁcations of qualifying data as capable of

supporting a speciﬁc task.
   Detailed research into the accuracy of crowdsourced map compilations remains
in its infancy due in part to the novelty of VGI and also due to problems with
approaching the measurement of the resultant data. Van Oort( 2005 ) presented a

comprehensive description of data quality standards, but a comprehensive analysis
of the various quality elements has not yet been conducted on a major crowdsourced
compilation system. The works of Haklay ( 2008, 2010 ) , Girres and Touy2a01(0 ) ,
and Zielstra and Zipf (2010), focused on OpenStreetMap and its positional accuracy
and completeness, have moved us toward more comprehensive analyses of crowd-

sourced compilation systems.



17.4.1 How Does Crowdsourcing of Map Data in Open
           and Hybrid Map Compilation Systems Measure Up?


We focus ﬁrst on OSM. Its crowdsourcing experience has been a successful demon-
stration of the ability to compile a map database that is popular, well regarded, and


 See Van Exel et al. (2010 ) , p. 3.
316                                                                       M.W. Dobson


freely available under an open license. Howevre , the notion thatan open crowdsourced
map database measures up in terms of data quality may be misleading. Many con      tri-
butors to pure crowdsourced systemsfor map compilation,such as OSM, place only

an informal emphasis on data speciﬁcations. Speciﬁcations may be lack ing, fuzzy,
considered too restrictive, regarded as too complex, and ignored by many of the
contributors to the system. Girres and Touya ( 2010) discuss the problematic aspects
of the heterogeneity of OSM data forFrance and concludethat the logical inconsis-
tencies in the data impede its use, other than for simple mapping (as opposed to use

in a GIS).
   Some might argue that all spatial databases are heterogeneous with respect to data
quality. For some aspects of data quality, this is undoubtedly true. Conversely, the
traditional compilation procedures underpinning commercial map database compila-
tion efforts have a record of producing databases suitable for navigation, location-

based services, GIS, and other applications that require a signiﬁcantly higher bar
than that met by OSM. Requirement to update commercial databases is, in many
cases, contractual. This distributes attention to correcting errors in areas on a system-
atic basis, as opposed to error correction based on personal interest, as is the practice
in open crowdsourced compilation systems. Perhaps more interesting is the question

of whether or not the crowdsourced input used in open VGI map compilation
systems consists of contributions that are independent of prejudice and not inﬂuenced
by groupthink while truly reﬂecting decentralized inputs of local knowledge.
   From the perspective of theory, the success of crowdsourced map compilation
systems for country or multi-country areas depends otn  he contributions ofa relatively

large number of participants distributed across the extent of the domain. Further, the
basic notion that “With more eyes, map errors become shallow” (apologies to Linus
Torvalds) requires some degree of spatial redundancy in terms of the distribution of
volunteers. One person contributing map data alone for a local area does not provide

the iterative approach to data evaluation or the editing that is crucial to producing
acceptable data quality in open crowdsourced map compilation systems. The need
to update map data over time reﬂects the unending nature of spatial change and adds
to the continual need for new contributors. Finally, the notion that these open map
databases are self-healing over time (errors will only be corrected when someone

notices) requires a constant ﬂow of new contributors to update thedatabase coverage,
as well as to replace those contributors who have lost interest or become inactive.
   By January of 2010, only 6 years from its founding, OSM had attracted over
200,000 contributors (Zielstra and Zipf 2010), but it appears that volunteering for
crowdsourcing and contributing on a frequent basis may be the exception rather

than the rule. The research of Budhathoki et al. ( 2010), based on data collected in
2009, indicated that the vast majority of contributors to OSM did so only once
(44%), with the number of one-time contributors lowest in Europe (approximately
42%) and hovering near or above 60% in Africa, Asia, North America, and South
America. Perhaps more troubling from a local knowledge perspective, Haklay

 (2008) provided a graph indicating that over 70% of the data then in the OSM cover-
age of England was the work of approximately 50 contributors, a trend that appears
in the continental areas presented in the research of Budhathoki et al. (2010 ) , where
17  VGI as a Compilation Tool for Navigation Map Databases                        317


a small number of people (0.6% globally) appear to have dominated the process
with each contributing over 100,000 nodes.
   In addition, Budhathoki et al.( 2010)provide an interesting portrait of the OSM

contributor. At the time of the study (2009 data), males comprised 96% of the map-
pers, of whom 64% were under the age of 40. Most contributors were highly educated
(49% had college degrees), while 21% had college and postgraduate degrees and
another 8% had doctoral degrees. Although the sample size was modesN     t (= 426), the
results may indicate that the OSM crowd is signiﬁcantly unlike the general population

in terms of sex ratio, education, or age distribution. While it is natural that the genera-
tion that has grown up with the Internet would be attracted to OSM and crowdsourc-
ing, it is equally clear that this group may not reﬂect the independence and diversity
of opinion suggested by Suroweicki (  2005) that constitutes an “intelligent” crowd.
   Yogi Berra, the famous American baseball player known for his folk wisdom, is

reputed to have said “You can see a lot just by looking.” A visual examination of the
OpenStreetMap database indicates that while the database has an amazing degree of
coverage, the coverage is neither complete nor is it comprehensive. The analysis of
Zielstra and Zipf( 2010), in their important study of OSM in Germany, indicated
that map coverage varied signiﬁcantly between urban and rural areas, as well

as between large cities and smaller cities. Haklay( 2010)noted the same types of
discrepancies in the OSM database of England, and similar discrepancies were
noted in the OSM database for France by Girres and Touya ( 2010 ) . These types of
coverage limitations raise questions of the widespread applicability of crowdsourced
data when it is used for map compilation in open systems.

   It is unclear whether those who do contribute data to OSM focus their contribu-
tions on local knowledge. Neis et al. (2012) note that the relatively high number of
streets in the OSM database of Germany lacking a name or a route designation may
result from these transportation links being digitized from satellite images by users

who were lacking local knowledge. Other research by Haklay et al. ( 2010 ) shows
that numerous contributors evaluate and edit the same instances of spatial informa-
tion but do so due to differences of opinion on the positional accuracy of previously
contributed work.
   Might the division of labor in OSM’s database result in variations in data quality and

completeness that inhibit the use of these data other than across limited urban areas,
where there are numerous contributors willing to volunteer local data? If the majority
of OSM contributors are spending their time digitizing imagery for the database, as
opposed to contributing GPS traces and attributes from paths along which they have
traveled or know something about, how likely is it that the OSM effort beneﬁts from

local knowledge to the same extent that it beneﬁts from free digitizing?
    Haklay (2010), in a study focused on OSM coverage in London, indicated that
there is a social bias in the contributions to the OSM database that is based on
afﬂuence and reﬂects a participation gap. Obviously one needs a computer, an
Internet connection, and plenty of spare time to digitize road networks, suggesting

an economic privilege that is not available to all members of society. Theﬁnding
suggests that the distribution of those able to contribute local knowledge to OSM
may not mirror the area of coverage tagreted for the database. Ifthis limiting scenario
318                                                                       M.W. Dobson


is a possibility, then who will attribute data in the areas not populated by those who
ﬁt the proﬁle of OSM contributors? Other research by Girres and Touya(          2010 )
indicated that data posted to the OSM database of France may be focused on ctaupred

objects of interest to the contributors at the expense of the comprehensiveness of the
OSM database.
   It may be that the self-synchronization of OSM contributors masks what is an
intended, but fatal, lack of direction impeding the comprehensive edit and update
of the OSM database. For instance, there is no reliable way to redirect the spatial

focus of the existing group of contributors, since the system, by deﬁnition, is self-
organizing. Further, it is unknown how long a period of time it will take an open
database to reach a level of completion for large coverage areas that is comparable
in quality to the databases produced by the leading commercial ﬁrms or by govern-
ment agencies. Nor is it possible to know how long it will take to correct an error

in the database, since this depends on whether a contributor is interested enough in
the location to edit it. Finally, the lack of data standardization and effective quality
control adds another layer of complexity to the problem of analyzing the compln   etss
of open crowdsourced databases.
   Supporters of the open compilation model would argue that because there are

no speciﬁcations for the database, there is also no such thing as a completed work.
While all spatial databases are incomplete, or inaccurate to some degree at any
given point in time, it is difﬁcult to appreciate the purpose of building a speciﬁcation-
less database that deﬁes any attempt tomanage its contributors toproduce a database
with some level of uniformity and completeness.

   OSM was developed, in part, because of the dissatisfaction with the high cost
and punitive licensing restrictions associated with commercial spatial databases
and those of some governments. If OSM was founded to remedy this dissatisfaction,
one might reasonably presume that the goal in building the OSM database should

to be to endow it with functionality and data quality similar to, if not better than,
that which it was designed to replace.
   Two of the supposed advantages of crowdsourced data compilation systems
are that they have no formal management structure (or the associated expenses) and
that they lack an overarching business structure. The lack of both may, in fact, be a

limitation when applied to map compilation.
   One of the advantages possessed by commercial mapping ﬁrms is that they have
customers who are willing to use their data based on their belief that it meets the cus-
tomers’ need for a speciﬁc level of data quality that supports a particular application.
Meeting that expectation requires the setting of standards for data and the implemen-

tation of a data compilation system capable of satisfying these proposed uses of the
database. Ensuring that the data meets customers’ needs is the responsibility of mar-
keting and editorial teams tasked with ensuring that customers’ needs are discovered,
established as compilation goals, and engineered into the database standards.
   Government agencies that compile spatial data do so using procedures designed to

meet the data requirement described in legislation that deﬁnes the mission of the agency
and requires the agency to collect data in compliance with the speciﬁed directives.
Open crowdsourced systems appear to lack the processes, checks, and balances com-
mon in other map database compilation efforts. This lack of structurm  e ay contribute
17   VGI as a Compilation Tool for Navigation Map Databases                           319

to the relative absence of logical consistency in open databases. As a consequence,

it appears that the lack of structure in the compilation process is a major factor imped-
ing the success of all attempts at open map compilation using crowdsourcing.
   The issues described above lead to the conclusion that OSM may fail in its
attempt to create a passably uniform global database. It is likely that VGI-based

compilation efforts will continue to struggle to complete sustainable databases in
locations other than major metropolitan areas, except perhaps in Germany, and
possibly England . Perhaps the open model for crowdsourced map compilation will

be effective only in certain places. If so, then there appears to be a potential role for
a hybrid compilation system that includes crowdsourcing in the areas neglected
by open systems. It seems logical that the use of VGI and crowdsourcing for map
compilation should be an attractive notion for commercial map database providers.




17.4.2 What Is the Status Quo of Commercial Efforts
            to Use Crowdsourcing?


Commercial mappingﬁrms have several advantages that do not accrue to open

crowdsourced compilation efforts. Foremost among these is the dependence of these
companies on successful marketing and licensing of a product that meets the accep-
tance criteria of their customers. NAVTEQ, for example, spent a signiﬁcant sum on
database creation and distribution in 2007 but licensed their database for the sum of
                                                          6
$853,287,000 during the same period (NAVTEQ2008 ). In some sense, the willing-
ness of customers to pay for the ability of the NAVTEQ database to meet their
product needs is a surrogate measure of the authority and trust with which the

NAVTEQ database is regarded.
   Most commercial map databaseﬁrms command some degree of authority and
trust based on their willingness to set data quality standards, collect data reﬂecting
these standards, institute discipline in correcting errors (veriﬁcation and editing),

establish targeted cyclical update programs, and demonstrate that errors discovered
by customers will be researched, corrected, and pushed into their distributio   network
in a reasonable amount of time (Fig. 17.2 ).

   In compilation systems used by commercialﬁrms, data quality is the result of
data collection according to speciﬁcations that are adhered to by teams trained in
compilation and data collection techniques, and veriﬁed by professional data-quality
editors who inspect and evaluate these data. Data that do not meet the standard

areﬂ agged during the compilation process and either immediately re-collected
or placed in the formal update queue. Most companies institute an ongoing data


 5
 The progress of OSM in developing a crowdsourced database in the United States, a country with
a rich history of publicly available, low-cost, nonproprietary spatial databases, appears to be less
impressive than in other areas of the world.
 2007 was the last year for which publicly available ﬁnancial data was available for NAVTEQ. Due
to its acquisition by Nokia in 2008, NAVTEQ ceased to have public responsibility to report on its
 ﬁ nancial health.
320                                                                      M.W. Dobson































 Fig. 17.2The update cycle used by commercialﬁrms and many government agencies often
experiences a beneﬁcial effect relthe use of the database productby customers orconstituents.
These external factors often help sharpen the research focus and agendas related to the targeting of
map updating (Image courtesy of TeleMapics LLC)

sensitivity process where areas suspected of signiﬁcant spatial changes are ﬂagged

for veriﬁcation and update, if required. Other changes in data quality are found by
systematically working research teams through all coverage areas over time, based
either on an established production cycle or on estimates of the rates of data change
in particular areas. The overall assignment of compilation activities is designed

to maximize the time value of money while increasing the integrity of the database.
It is this attempt to actively harmonize the information in the database that distin-
guishes commercial database compilation efforts from the relatively unstructured

efforts that surround the update of open systems dependent on crowdsourcing for an
iterative data evaluation, collection, and posting cycle.
   While commercial databases might be more reliable and have more uniformity
in terms of data compiled using traditional compilation techniques, even with the

beneﬁts of signiﬁcant spending, these databases often are out of date, inaccurate,
noncomprehensive, of variable quality, and possibly too expensive to maintain.
NAVTEQ 2    (008), for example, in their 2007 10-K Annual Report to the Security
and Exchange Commission of the United States, revealed that their database

creation and distribution cost for the year 2007 was $395,778,000, an increase of
over $120 million from the prior year (p. 36). Even with this massive expenditure,
it appears that the NAVTEQ database is not without its weaknesses (Dobs2    on10c,d ) .
17  VGI as a Compilation Tool for Navigation Map Databases                       321
























 Fig. 17.3Google’s compilation is a classic example of the hybrid process. It fuses traditional
compilation techniques with crowdsourcing through the use of active and passive community
inputs (Image courtesy TeleMapics, LLC)

   However, the advantages of the commercial approach to compilation combin     weith

active crowdsourcing in a hybrid compilation system could be deployed to improve
data quality in commercial navigation databases. The focus on this hybridization
in commercial environments should be on methods for incentivizing users totcro ibnute
information on errors and omissions based on their personal, local knowledge. It is

likely that commercial ﬁrms would be interested in using crowdsourcing as a source
of local knowledge related to map attributes that might be incorrect or incomplete,
as well as information on recent developments postdating their most recent da staeep
of the area. While open crowdsourced systems could adapt the commercial colm   atiin

techniques, I believe that there currently are too many cultural/processual manm geent
barriers for this to happen.
   Google, through Google Maps, is currently the leading example of the hybrid
approach to map compilation, using active crowdsourcing for both the original build

of its map database, as well as the revision of its database. As shown in Fig. 17.3 ,
Google collects input based on partnerships with authoritative sources of spatial
data, as well as ventures with other map data suppliers. It combines these data with
crowdsourcing (both active and passive contributions), imagery (satellite, aerial,

and Street View), augmented by data mining and conﬂation to produce an effective
fusion of sources to create the database for Google Maps.
   It is likely that Google’s original database build process (Fig.17.4) was imagery
driven and leveraged crowdsourcing coupled with data mining and the conﬂation of
authoritative data sources to create its original database. In the revision process

(Fig. 17.5), however, it appears that crowdsourcing is the key input, queuing up the
areas in which updated imagery and authoritative data are required to improve the
quality of the database.
322                                                                          M.W. Dobson

 Fig. 17.4 The build process

used by Google to create
their map database of the
United States relied on
traditional compilation
techniques more than on
crowdsourcing (Image
courtesy of TeleMapics LLC)










 Fig. 17.5 Google relies on
VGI/crowdsourcing as the
prime revision and change-
detection tool for their US
database (Image courtesy of
TeleMapics LLC)











   Crowdsourcing was a relatively unimportant consideration during the build of
the Google Maps proprietary database of the United States (Fig.         17.4 ). Database

sources that Google considered authoritative on national and local scales (federal
agencies for national coverage augmented by authoritative or trusted state, regional,
and city sources) were acquired and conﬂated to provide a base that could be updated

by reference to current imagery (satellite, aerial, and Street View). Since the Google
model for the United States portion of its database was to control the geometry,
connectivity, and data attribution for the initial database build, crowdsourcing played

a limited, indirect role in the initial development effort. It is likely that the main use
of crowdsourcing was to target areas identiﬁed in customer complaints as being of
low quality that related the company’s previous use of commercial map databases.

Data mining was used to search the Internet for additional information on the geog-
raphy of interest. This included the mining of Google’s own search click-stream to
unearth potentially relevant information for augmenting the database. Conﬂation
processes were used to relate and integrate the various spatial data collected.

   It is Google’s revision process for the US database where crowdsourcing is used
as the main update agent, principally through the use of Google Map Maker,
although this may not have been the company’s original intent (Fig. 17.5 ).
17  VGI as a Compilation Tool for Navigation Map Databases
                                                                                    323

 Fig. 17.6 Google’s use of
both   active and passive
community updates to revise
its own maps is a critical
aspect of its success in the
local advertising market and
a fundamental aspect of its
strategy for keeping its maps

up-to-date in local
communities (Image courtesy
of TeleMapics LLC)






   In terms of crowdsourcing, Google beneﬁts from its enormous reach and its
popularity as a search engine, which serve to attract users to Google Maps and
Map Maker. It is the classic case of more eyes helping to reduce error, and Google

can attract more of these than any other commercial map database provider. This is
quite fortunate for Google, since the initial quality of its US database was quite low
(Dobson 2009 ) .
   Originally Google attempted to resolve this problem through the development of

new algorithms, but they soon changed their approach (Dobson           2010e ) . Google
realized that improving the quality of their US database would require analysis
by those with the beneﬁcial local knowledge required to correct errors that were
too elusive or confounded to be discovered and remedied by software methods.

As a consequence, in 2011 the company turned to crowdsourcing/VGI through
the use of Google Map Maker as a method of soliciting users of Google Maps to
provide critical local detail to Google’s database (Fig 17.6; Dobson 2011c ) .

   Access to the Map Maker functionality is provided to those willing to correct the
Google Maps’ US map. However, instead of the peer review process which is
used by Google in many countries, the contributions of users in the United States
who edit the map are evaluated by a team of “trusted reviewers” who are Google

employees. Google’s “trusted reviewers” appearto have limitedknowledgeon which
to base their evaluation of the edits for local geographies. For instance, these revieesw
are not located in the United States. In addition, each of Google’s reviewers not
only evaluates user data contributions across the entire United States but also edits

user data contributions for numerous countries around the world (Dobson 2011b ) .
At some time in the future, Map Maker contributions for the US map may be evaatleu    d
by the peer community of contributors located in and familiar with local detail
across the United States. For now,Google appears unwilling torelinquish itseditorial

purview and in doing so may impede the degree to which local knowledge can be
used to improve their Google Maps database in the United States.
   Unlike OpenStreetMap where contributors can edit any aspect of the map db      aatse,
contributors using Google’s Map Maker are allowed to edit only select features and,

in some cases, only certain aspects of select features (Dobson2011a ) . For example,
324                                                                       M.W. Dobson




















 Fig. 17.7 Both VGI and traditional compilation systems are inﬂuenced by human factors. Blending
these differences is required to produce an effective hybrid compilation system (Image courtesy of
TeleMapics LLC)



incorrect boundary information describing the jurisdiction within which the feature
is located is not editable by contributors, nor is some information related to street
geometry. In effect, Google has decided the categories of edits that it will allow and
reserves other data categories for editing based on data compiled from sources
Google considers more authoritative than local users. Google has likely taken these

steps in an attempt to ensure logical consistency within their database. Regardless
of the limitations in its approach, Google appears to be doing a better job of soliiitg
VGI than its competitors and has the strongest chance of adapting crowdsourced
data with its algorithmic approach in an attempt to produce a superior database.
   At present, no commercial ﬁrm is able to produce the kinds of beneﬁts that, at

least theoretically, should result from the use of VGI in their compilation process.
The reason for this shortcoming is the inability toﬁnd a management platform
that blends the limitations and advantages of traditional compilation techniques
with the limitations and advantages of crowdsourcing in a manner that produces a
superior compilation system (Fig1 . 7.7). It is clear that tGI can providesigni ﬁ cant

beneﬁts, but only if government and commercial entities canﬁnd the appropriate
technique for integrating the beneﬁts of VGI in a method that accommodates the
limitations and beneﬁts of the parent system.



   17.5       Summary and Conclusions


This chapter has examined the role of volunteered geographic information atsaians absle
compilation tool for the purposes of creating map databases used for navigation.
While professional and commercial mapping organizations have many advantages
17  VGI as a Compilation Tool for Navigation Map Databases                          325


in creating detailed navigation databases, it is clearly the case the their efforts fall
short in terms of data accuracy, speciﬁcally in respect to coverage and the currency
of the data mapped. Crowdsourcing in the form of active and passive community

input provide a potential, renewable source of local data that may provide more
consistent map databases than other alternatives. It is our conclusion, however, that
a hybridization of map compilation techniques combining standard approaches used
by government and commercial entities with the beneﬁts of volunteered geographic
information will likely produce map databases with qualities exceeding the basic

capabilities of either method used separately.
   As a ﬁnal note, the use of crowdsourcing in today’s hybrid compilation systems
is too restrictive. Governments and commercial entities producing spatial databases
should consider the following recommendations to reap increased beneﬁts from the
use of VGI:

• Add improved structure/taxonomy to features and objects available to crowd-
   sourced editing.

• Increase the types of features and objecttshat can be editedthrough crowdsourcing
   to beneﬁt from local knowledge.
• Provide multiple paths/solutions/software tools as an alternative to current
   methods that limit the ﬂexibility of users who are attempting to contribute local
   information.

• Remove the constraints of the currentedit systems for more dv   i erse crowdsourced
   data. Provide a form or otherwise solicitthe contributors’ suggestionson the need
   for corrections in objects, particularly complexobjects (e.g., overpasses, tunnels),
   for which edits and modiﬁcations are not allowed.

• Provide metadata for aerial, satellite, andstreet-side imagery to allow contributors
   to understand the potential temporal limitations of the imagery accessible during
   an editing session.
• Track the IP addresses of users on an anonymous basis to determine a coarse
   location for the user, and use this as a factor in establishing an initial categoriza-

   tion of whether contributors, and particularly editors, might have relevant local
   knowledge related to the location being edited.
• Establish user history proﬁles that cross-compare edit location, edit quality, and
   user location to help evaluate contributions.
• Tune data spam ﬁlters to focus on logical consistency issues.

• Make the editorial review for evaluation of contributed data more transparent
   and helpful. Follow best practices and do not allow edits to be ignored, rejected
   without reason, or responded to with potentially derogatory or irrelevant com-
   ments (“You don’t have the experience to make this type of correction.”)
• Establish a hierarchy of authoritative sources for database features using mea-

   sures of data quality and temporal considerations against which all crowdsourced
   contributions can be evaluated to help select those data and attributes that would
   most bene ﬁ t from crowdsourcing.

   Jenkins et al. (2009) describe the challenges of participatory cultures. VGI is a
prime example of a participatory culture that provides a unique and challenging
 326                                                                              M.W. Dobson


 environment both for the contributors, as well as for those who hope to beneﬁt from

 assets developed by these groups. While it is unclear whether online participatory
 cultures are long-term phenomena or will be time-bound to the generation that
 founded them, these systems currently have a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on map comtp             iila

 systems. As envisioned by Jenkins, participatory cultures provide low barriers to
 contribution, support for creating and sharing, informal mentorship, belief that
                                                                                             7
 contributions matter, and some degree of connection through a social network                  .
 Clearly cro wdsourced map compilation systems are an example of a participatorc           yul-

 ture and one that may forever change the nature of spatial database compilation.




    References


 Budhathoki, N., Haklay, M., & Nedovic-Budic, Z. (2010). Who map in OpenStreetMap and why?
     Presentation at State of the Map, Open Street Map.http://www.slideshare.net/nbudhat2/sotm-
     us-2010-nama-r-budhathoki . Accessed 23 Oct 2011.
 Coleman, D. (2012). Potential contributions and challenges of VGI for conventional topographic

     base-mapping programs. In D. Sui, S. Elwood, & M. Goodchild (Eds.)V, olunteered geographic
     information: New development and applications. Berlin: Springer.
 Dobson, M. (2007). TomTom, Tele Atlas and map updating, the road to UGC (Exploring Local
     Blog. TeleMapics LLC).  http://blog.telemapics.com/?p=40. Accessed 25 Oct 2011.
   Dobson, M. (2009F  ).ield checking the Google base (Exploring Local Blog. TeleMapics LLC).

     http://blog.telemapics.com/?p=211. Accessed 25 Oct 2011.
 Dobson, M. (2010a). TomTom, Tele Atlas and map share  . Exploring Local Blog. TeleMapics LLC.
     http://blog.telemapics.com/?p=323. Accessed 27 Oct 2011.
  Dobson, M. (2010b). MapQuest on Botox, Tele Atlas on Detox . Exploring Local Blog. TeleMapics
     LLC.  http://blog.telemapics.com/?p=334#comments. Accessed 28 Oct 2011.
  Dobson, M. (2010c). Map accuracy, Google, NAVTEQ and fre.eExploring Local Blog. TeleMapics

     LLC.  http://blog.telemapics.com/?p=241. Accessed 23 Oct 2011.
 Dobson, M. (2010d). Nokia news and NAVTEQ does it again. Exploring Local Blog . TeleMapics
     LLC.  http://blog.telemapics.com/?p=279. Accessed 26 Oct 2011.
 Dobson, M. (2010e). Google plays whack-a-mole.Exploring Local Blog. TeleMapics LLC.      http://
     blog.telemapics.com/?p=282 . Accessed 28 Oct 2011.

 Dobson, M. (2011a). Google map maker’s edit and authority system part 1. Exploring Local Blog.
     TeleMapics LLC.   http://blog.telemapics.com/?p=371. Accessed 28 Oct 2011.
 Dobson, M. (2011b). Google map maker’s review and authority system part 2.    Exploring Local
     Blog. TeleMapics LLC.  http://blog.telemapics.com/?p=374. Accessed 24 Oct 2011.
 Dobson, M. (2011c). Google map maker goes crowdsourced in the United States on “Judgment

     Day”. Exploring Local Blog. TeleMapics LLC.    http://blog.telemapics.com/?p=368. Accessed
     25 Oct 2011.
  Girres, J., & Touya, G. (2010). Quality assessment of the French OpenStreetMap dasratn.sactions
     in GIS, 12 (4), 435–459.
Goodchild, M. (2007). Citizens as sensors: The world of volunteered geography.     GeoJournal,
     69 (4), 211–221.

 Guélat, J. (2009, August).Integration of user generated content into national databases – Revision
     work ﬂ ow at swissto.p1ost EuroSDR Workshop on Crowdsourcing, Federal Ofﬁce of



  7
  Jenkins et al. 2009, pp. 5–6
  17   VGI as a Compilation Tool for Navigation Map Databases                                 327


     Topography, Wabern, Switzerland.      http://www.eurosdr.net/workshops/crowdsourcing_2009/

     presentations/c-4.pdf. Accessed 20 Oct 2011.
    Haklay, M. (2008U ).nderstanding the quality of user generated mapping . Department of Civil,
     Environmental and Geomatic Engineering, University College London. PowerPoint Presentation.
      http://www.slideshare.net/mukih/osm-quality-assessment-2008-presentation?from=ss_embed.

     Accessed 15 Sept 2011.
 Haklay, M. (2010). How good is volunteered geographical information? A comparative study of
     OpenStreetMap and ordnance survey datasets. Environment and Planning, B, 37 , 682–703.
  Haklay, M., Basiouka, S., Antoniou, V., & Ather, A. (2010). How many volunteers does it take to

     map an area well? The validity of Linus’ Law to volunteered geographic information.      The
     Cartographic Journal, 47 (4), 315–322.
   Harvey, F. (2012). To volunteer or to contribute locational information: Truth-in-labeling for crowd-
     sourced geographic information. In D. Sui, S. Elwood, & M. Goodchild (Eds.),     Volunteered

     geographic information: New development and applications. Dordrecht: Springer.
  Heipke, C. (2010). Crowdsourcing geospatial data.ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote
     Sensing, 65 , 550–557.
ISO (International Organization of Standardization), Technical Committee 211. (2002).         ISO

     19113, Geographic information – Quality principles. Geneva: ISO.    http://www.isotc211.org/.
     Accessed 15 Oct 2011.
 ISO (International Organization for Standardization). (2004).   ISO 14825, Intelligent transport
     systems – Geographic dataﬁles (GDF) – Overall data speciﬁcation      . Geneva: International

     Organization of Standardization.
 Jenkins, H., Purushotma, R., Weigel, M., Clinton, K., & Robison, A. (2009).      Confronting the
     challenges of participatory culture: Media education for the 21st century . Cambridge, MA:
     MIT Press (Resource document).

    NAVTEQ Corporation. (2008F    ). rm 10-K annual reportﬁled with the securities and exchange
     commission of the United States, Washington D.C . Financial Disclosure. NAVTEQ.        http://
     www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/834208/000110465908014358/a08-2455_110k.htm.          Accessed
     24 Sept 2011.

Neis, P., Zielstra, D., & Zipf, A. (2012). The street network evolution of crowdsourced maps:
     OpenStreetMap in Germany 2007–2011. Future Internet, 4(1), 1–21. doi:    10.3390/ ﬁ 4010001 .
    Shirky, C. (2008H)e.re comes everybody. New York: Penguin Press HC.
  Stage, D. (2009, February). Authority and authoritative data: A clariﬁcation of terms and concepts.

     Fair & Equitable, 13–16.  http://www.iaao.org/uploads/Stage.pdf. Accessed 20 Sept 2011.
    Surowiecki, J. (20T05).wisdom of crowds: Why the many are smarter than the few and how ctoilvec
     wisdom shapes business, economies, societies and natio.ns ew York: Anchor Books Edition.
 Tapscott, D., & Williams, A. (2008).   Wikinomics: How mass collaboration changes everything .

     London: Penguin.
    TomTom. (2011)T.omTom makes the largest historic, trafﬁc database in the world available for
     governments and enterprises via its online web portal . Press Release. TomTom B.V.     http://
     corporate.tomtom.com/releasedetail.cfm?ReleaseID=545204     . Accessed 23 Jan 2012.

  Van Exel, M., Dias, E., & Fruijtierm, S. (2010. he impact of crowdsourcingon spatial dataquality
     indicators .http://www.giscience2010.org/pdfs/paper_213.pdf. Accessed 14 Oct 2011.
     Van Oort, P. (20S0p5a)t.ial data quality: From description to application. PhD thesis.Geodesy 60,
     NGC (Netherlands Commission for Geodesy) Delft, the Netherlands.     http://www.ncg.knaw.nl/

     Publicaties/Geodesy/pdf/60Oort.pdf  . Accessed 27 Oct 2011.
  Zielstra, D., & Zipf, A. (2010, May).A comparative study of proprietary geodata and volunteered
     geographic information for Germany. 13th AGILE International Conference on Geographic
     Information Science, Guimarães, Portugal.     http://agile2010.dsi.uminho.pt/pen/ShortPapers_

     PDF%5C142_DOC.pdf       . Accessed 10 Oct 2011.
   Chapter 18
 VGI and Public Health: Possibilities and Pitfalls



    Christopher Goranson         ,  Sayone Thihalolipavan , and        Nicolás di Tada











 Abstract Recent advances in technologies that alo for the collection ofvolunteered
geographic information (VGI) are providing new opportunities for health research.
These technologies provide for the collection of time-sensitive, ﬂuid data from a broad

pool of subjects using sophisticated yet easy-to-use data collection tools – principally
the smartphone and other location-aware devices. Never before has it been so easy for
health researchers to collect and analyze real-time location-based data. The result of
which can provide continuously updated datasets that often capture a more than just a

snapshot of events or environmental factors. These technologies also allow the
researcher to create novel datasets that do not presently exist. However, the use of such
technologies to collect potentially identiﬁable data poses risks to both the researcher

and the subject. The tools introduce new challenges and ethical problems if used
improperly for health research. This chapter investigates both the potential of VGI
in public health research while discussing some challenges of using technology
platforms that can leverage and provide collection tools for volunteered geographic

information.








  C. Goranso*n) (
  Parsons Institute for Information Mapping , The New School , New York, NY, USA
e-mail: goransoc@newschool.edu.

  S. Thihalolipavan
Bureau of Chronic Disease Prevention & Tobacco Control, New York City Department
of Health and Mental Hygiene , New York, NY, USA

  N. di Tada
Innovative Support to Emergencies Diseases and Disasters (InSTEDD),
 Palo Alto, CA , USA


D. Sui et al. (eds.), Crowdsourcing Geographic Knowledge: Volunteered Geograp329
Information (VGI) in Theory and Practice, DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-4587-2_18,
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
330                                                                 C. Goranson et al.


    18.1      Introduction


Recent technological advances combined with a more geographically aware
population are introducing new opportunities and challenges for data collection for
public health purposes. Volunteered geographic information (VGI) generally refers
to data volunteered by individuals, including a geographic component, that can be

later disseminated using various tools (Goodchild 2007). VGI data itself can also be
thought of as any data provided by an individual that includes some geographic
context and which allows for the aggregation and dissemination of data based on
this information. Even throughout this book and chapter, the Goodchild’s is the
prevailing deﬁnition, the “volunteering” of geographic information did not suddenly
start in the last few years – rather our ability to rapidly collect, conceptualize, and

use this information has grown signiﬁcantly. This is important because some of the
traditional methods by which individuals share geographic information can transfer
knowledge about the individual quickly and in ways that was not possible or was
much more difﬁcult only a few years ago.
   Today, new tools are providing ways for individuals, communities, corporations,

and governments to harness volunteered geographic informationwithout necessarily
needing a fully functional geographic information system (GIS). Terms like GPS,
GIS, and location-based services are more commonplace in the media and used
much more frequently by the general public. The popularization of tools like
Google’s My Maps, Google Earth, Microsoft’s Virtual Earth (now Bing Maps),

foursquare, OpenStreetMap, and others has made spatial processes and data more
accessible. Google’s My Maps provides free tools for the creation of vector data.
Users can create features on an existing base map by adding attributed locations
as points (an address), lines (a popular jogging path), or polygons (favorite neigh-
borhood to hang out in; location of a popular street fair). Users can also overlay
and georectify digital images in products like Google Earth. New cloud-based

services like those available through ArcGIS.com are even providing free access
to some of the functionality found in common GIS desktop software. Cloud-based
GIS services are providing more opportunities for collaboration among GIS users,
and relatively little instruction is necessary in order to leverage these tools. GPS
units, once commonplace, are now being replaced by similar functionality in smart-

phones. As a result, many spatial processes, once requiring expensive GIS software,
hardware, GIS datasets, and technical expertise, are now exposing traditional GIS
tools to a broader audience. Some of these advances and increase in interest have
partially been achieved through better usability and improved user interface design.
These advances have all contributed to the removal of some traditional barriers to

entry in GIS. Some believe this has even contributed towards the creation of two
new disciplines – neogeography and neocartography. Whether or not these tools
and techniques lend themselves to entirely new disciplines remains to be seen. It is
clear that the methods and access through which geographic data is collected,
analyzed, and disseminated will never be the same. The use of VGI promises to do

what KML and subsequent adoption as an Open Geospatial Consortium standard
(OGC   2011) did for GIS data.
18  VGI and Public Health: Possibilities and Pitfalls                            331


   Tools like InSTEDD’s GeoChat allow for groups or individuals to share, com   ment
on, and collect location-based information, later aggregating it to create datasets
capable of display in a GIS. GeoChat is designedto work essentiallyas a groupchat;

the program was originally designed to allow groups of individuals to communicate
during an emergency and report an information (InSTEDD       2011 ) . The application
provides an easy way to catalog location-based, temporal information using just
a cell phone equipped with SMS texting capabilities. Products like OpenDataKit
provide an open-source set of tools that allow users to create and disseminate

surveys using smartphones (ODK2011 ) . Using sus     chstems, users caneasily create
their own forms for data collection activities in the ﬁeld. Because the cost of devel-
opment of the form and systems is easily scalable, they can be adapted by small or
large groups.
   For the public health researcher, these tools may at ﬁrst glance seem trivial, but

they are providing new opportunities to gather information from individuals
and communities using cheap and efﬁcient methods. Anyone who can send a simple
text message on their cellular phone can inform a study or provide geographically
referenced data and thereby potentially create information that is not available
in any standard dataset. The short message service (SMS) protocol allows for very

short bursts of data to be shared with not only individuals but groups of individuals,
parsed and aggregated to create bigger datasets and viewed on a map when geoc   abdle
information is included. This approach towards data collection and aggregation can
provide much needed quantitative and qualitative data, capturing a variety of vaariles
that would enable increased understanding of physical and/or built environments.

For urban areas, these tools may aid in better understanding an individual’s percipn
of safety, identify or document environmental health concerns, better understand
what a neighborhood means to the individual, collect data during health events
or emergencies, or better understand how the food environment is viewed by the

individual across various socioeconomic status (SES) measures. These new, rich
data sources would provide a tapestry of information that better reﬂects the realities
of those inhibitors that presently block or discourage access to a variety of health
services, identify health behaviors, provide for a better understanding of the built
environment’s impact on health, and will help to identify outreach strategies at a

neighborhood level.




18.2 The Potential for VGI in Public Health Practice

In 2011, the New York CityDepartment of Health and MentalHygiene, withstudent

volunteer support from CUNY’s School of Public Health at Hunter College, under-
took a study to evaluate the concentrations of alcohol advertisements throughout
New York City (NYC DOHMH 2009). The study was partially based on earlier
results gathered through a similar sampling performed that summer with support
from local community groups by the department’s Bureau of Alcohol and Drug

Use, Prevention, Care and Treatment. In both studies, GeoChat was used to catalog
332                                                                  C. Goranson et al.


alcohol advertisements into three broad categories: type of advertisement, type of
alcohol, and brand. In the fall of 2011, a strategy for gathering location-based
information on the advertisements was devised in which a random sample of 30 ZIP

codes across three income categories (low, medium, high) were selected, and teams
were sent out to capture the location of alcohol advertisements using nothing more
than a cell phone and a copy record forbackup and notes. The resultwas thecreation
of a point dataset that represented the alcohol advertisements throughout the 30
selected ZIP codes.

   Surveys provide another logical opportunity for the attributed collection of
geographic data – either administered by a survey subject directly through an
application or administered to them byﬁeld staff. In survey design, VGI pro-
vides a way to    collect results that leverage geography. In New York City, the
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene conducts an annual survey of approxi-

mately 10,000 New Yorkers called the Community Health Survey (NYC DOHMH
2009). In this survey, respondents are asked a series of questions – information
from questions such as “Have you ever been told by a doctor that you have diabe-
tes?” provides neighborhood-level estimates for a variety of health indicators. In
all, approximately 35 of these indicators in any given year can be mapped. In all

cases, ZIP codes are the only geographic indicator other than the phone preﬁx
(which is not generally used to identify place except in cases where the provided
ZIP code does not exist    or cannot be properly aggregated). Because the survey
needs to maintain a high level of statistical validity, ZIP code level data is rolled up
into groups of two or three ZIP codes which comprise what are called United

Hospital Fund(UHF) neighborhoods. These neighborhoods are good approxima-
tions for place at a subborough level (boroughs in New York City are counties) but
are often criticized for not being at a ﬁne-enough scale to identify very small com-
positional differences between neighborhoods. UHF neighborhoods often group

disparate areas together, which makes the term “neighborhood” a bit of a misno-
mer. Still, the Community Health Survey provides detail-rich data which guide
many public health programs. VGI holds some unique promise for improving the
geographic accuracy of surveys like the Community Health Survey. For one, using
VGI allows the survey participant to provide location-based information that is not

dependent on their ZIP code or home address. Location-based services can capture
a point returned by the GPS in the phone or by triangulation using cell phone tow-
ers. Alternately, if it is determined that such information is too sensitive, partici-
pants in a survey can be aggregated to a predeﬁned or ﬂexible grid. In the case of
a predeﬁned grid, participants and their respective answers are grouped into grid

boundaries or existing polygon neigh borhood deﬁnitions, like the NYC Projection
Areas created by the NYC Department of City Planning. In this way, the partici-
pant’s exact location is only necessary to assign a neighborhood deﬁnition.
Alternately, if a location is recorded, the exact information can be loaded into any
administrative boundary, where the underlying population is sufﬁciently large to

ensure statistical validity in the dataset.
   In the case of epidemiological investigations, VGI may provide opportunities
to crowdsource accurate spatial representations of travel patterns and behavior. For
18  VGI and Public Health: Possibilities and Pitfalls                              333


example, in a tuberculosis or food-borne illness investigation, if a contact issected,
the user may turn on a tracking mechanism that reports all place history, times, and
length of stay for a period of time. When compared to others that are identiﬁed as
existing in that same cohort, relationships can be identiﬁed that were previously

unnoticed. The information feed can also be passv  ie. Location-aware individualscan
behave as public health “lookouts” or sentinels. When one of these individuals
becomes ill or otherwise affected by a public health concern, the entire place histo-
ries can help to identify spatial relationships that were not evident before.
   Understanding the relationship between proximity to healthy food and health is

something that VGI can help to address. By enlisting local community groups and
volunteers, a robust dataset can be sourced that reﬂects locations of quality and type
of food sources, as well as the opinions and insight that a community can bring to
better understanding an area’s local tapestry. Existing government data sources and
initiatives can be enhanced and further populated by the VGI experience. In New
York City, the recent Food Retail Expansion to Support Health (FRESH) initiative

identiﬁed food desserts through a Supermarket Need Index (SNI) (Smith et al.
2011). The SNI is an index that reﬂects a number of variables in the calculation of
need, including population, access to a car, poverty, number of fresh fruits and
vegetables, obesity, and diabetes. The initiativand follow-up work betweenthe NYC
Department of City Planning, NYC Department of Health and Mental Hygiene, and

NYC Economic Development Corporation provide insight into how many variables
contribute to the creation of a high-need area. However, there are other indicators
of place that are not widely accounted for. One example is the deﬁnition of a neigh-
borhood itself; the NYC Department of City Planning’s Projection Areas serve as
better approximations of neighborhoods than ZIP codes, but it is clear that neigh-

borhoods do not start or stop at distinct Project Area boundaries.



   18.3       Privacy Concerns and Health Data


Clinical and public health practitioners are wellware of theimportance ofprotecting
the conﬁdentiality of personally identiﬁable information. However, the collection
and disclosure of personally identiﬁable information in this novel geographic
context are less understood by many public health researchers. Privacy is always a
top issue in technology circles – major privacy breaches and a lack of transparency

into how users’ data is used have recently reignited some public awareness of
privacy concerns. As technology giants begin harnessing larger and larger datasets
that include spatial information, new data sources provide yet further opportunities
for the exploitation of personally identiﬁable information (Forbes 2011 ) . Companies
like Google are realizing that in order to compete in big data environments, simpli-

fying the process by which data can be connected is important. In 2012, Google
got “rid of over 60 different privacy policies” and replaced them with “one that’s a
lot shorter and easier to read.” The stated goal was to create a more seamless exenecie
for users (Google 2012 ) .
334                                                                  C. Goranson et al.


   It is not clear that these companies are fully aware of the precedent they are
establishing when ﬁrst releasing potentially personally identiﬁable information into
the wild and later placing restrictions on data access or protections in place once
problems have been identiﬁed. A recent CNET investigation found that Microsoft

had collected spatial data on laptops, cell phones, and Wi-Fi devices and released
that information on the web without taking precautions that other companies with
similar datasets (e.g., Google) had (CNET     2011). In public health research, the
notion that removing attribute data from a person’s geographic footprint and thereby
only linking things by geographic and temporal proximity should not be seen as a

sufﬁcient mode of protecting an individual. Reverse geocoding, a process of identi-
fying a street address from a point on a map, provides plenty of opportunities for
identifying an individual, as do time-stamped geographic data or travel paths
(Brownstein et al.2005). Therefore, it is up to the public health researcher to ensure
that such requirements for privacy are met. John Snow’s legendary Broad Street
map of cholera cases in 1854 would presentproblems in a peer-reviewedpublication

today. However, spot maps are still a popular way to depict emerging cases during
epidemiological investigations.
   One clear way to address this problem is through simple education of the public
health researcher. A street address, forxeample, can already beconsideredcon ﬁ dential
information, but the context of the information, say a spreadsheet versus an online

map, does not change the conﬁdentiality of the data. While the risk associated with
the publication of a spot map identifying the location of HIV-infected patients, for
example, may be very obvious to health researchers today, ethical challenges in
applying GIS in a public health settingremain. Furthermore, withthe democratization
of geographic information, more personally identiﬁable datasets are created,

collected, and analyzed by individuals that hvae no formalhealth education,training,
or work experience. Therefore, it is quite possible that health-related applications
emerge which are created either by indv iiduals without a healthsciences background
or an incentive to adequately protect privacy.
   Ethics in geographic information science remains an underexplored topic. While

GIS is heavily used in oil and gas exploration, environmental sciences, and military
intelligence, the investigation of appropriate and ethical use in the literature is weak
(Goodchild 2011). Recently, however, there have been initiatives, papers, and pre-
sentations on ethics in GIS, of which the most visible and rigorous exploration of
these issues are a series of graduate seminars through a National Science Foundation
Grant (Penn State 2010 ) .




   18.4      Ethical Norms in Public Health


For the public health researcher, collecting data using VGI is a novel method of data
capture but can use many of the standard approaches the researcher is likely already
familiar with. As discussed thus far, tools that provide for the collection of VGI
allow for the opportunity to collect spatial information by a subject or group of
18  VGI and Public Health: Possibilities and Pitfalls                               335


subjects. In traditional public health data collection practice, it may be common to
collect standard US Postal Service information including a person’s country, state,
ZIP code, residential address, and name. Using a survey tool like OpenDataKit, a

user can be prompted to enter all the same information through their smartphone.
Spatial information can also be collected directly from the device. If the collection
of geographic information is continuous over a period of time, it is possible to real-
istically ascertain a residence, workplace, and commuting pattern of an individual.
Google’s Latitude does just that – by passively monitoring a user, with their permis-

sion, the application will build a personal history proﬁle, even providing statistics
on how often one stays at work, where the individual travels most frequently, and
during what times of the week.
   Because a person’s geographic history can be collected and retained directly in
the device, there is the risk that this location-based information can be collected

without the person’s awareness or consent. Ee  vn if consent is provided, theindividual
may not be aware of the extent of additional information that can be ascertained
about him/her simply by providing a steady stream of location-based information.
The recent uproar surrounding the disclosure that the “Carrier IQ software was
being used by phone manufacturers and carriers to monitor performance without

implicit knowledge of the individual” is one recent example and has led to thea   ctone
of draft legislation towards a Mobile Device Privacy Act (Ars Technica 2012 ) .
   By retaining detail-rich spatial and temporal data histories, the researcher can
determine the place and time of many events surrounding the subject. While
this information can be immensely useful for understanding patterns, links, and

relationships between people and place, it can also compromise a person’s identity.
As mentioned previously, it would be wrong to assume that the removal of perso     ally
identiﬁable information except for the subject’s latitude/longitude, travel paths or
footprints, or travel history is itself sufﬁcient for protecting patient conﬁdentiality.

It is easy to see how one could readily determine with reasonable accuracy an HIV
patient’s particular habits by simply reverse geocoding the estimated point of
residence and cross-checking the other place visits with facilities in the area. This
might lead one to determine a particular individual visiting an HIV clinic, or a
domestic violence victim visiting a shelter or support group. If such information is

disclosed (the location of an Alcoholics Anonymous meeting, domestic violence
shelter, STD treatment facility), the exposure of just one subject could risk exposure
of others who have not provided consent. In this manner, people essentially become
sentinels for behavior, and while public health uses abound, threats to privacy and
security do too. If consumers were made aware of the power of their own geo-

graphic footprint, they would in turn be more likely to protect it the same way they
do their home address. Today, geographic data collected by location-aware devices
is almost always coupled with temporal data, which can make it exponentially more
powerful. The question of where someone lives or works becomes, “Where were
you last Saturday evening?”

   Consumers are however prone to quickly accept these caveats in the interest of
using the latest application, and marketers of these products are happy to make that
process easy. A legally binding document or agreement would simply be skipped
 336                                                                C. Goranson et al.


 over by a quick selection of the “I Accept” button, whereby consumers would
 be willing to give up highly personal information in exchange for the value of a
 service. Furthermore, certain services might be constructed whereby they were
 essential, leaving the customer little opportunity to consider an alternative with

 which they would not sacriﬁce such information.
   The most recent draft of the Personal health record (PHR) by the Ofﬁce of the
 National Coordinator for Health Information Technology states that “Health informa-
 tion stored in a personal health record is under the control of the patient” (ONCHIT
 2010a, b). This draft goes on to highlight how different vendors should use a uniﬁed

 method, similar to that of a nutritional label on food packaging to alert customers
 to privacy and security. A similar approach or model for the use of VGI might also
 be appropriate, thereby putting the control of one’s personal geographic history
 back in the hands of the individual. It is also important that individuals also retain
 some responsibility and understand what they are responsible for. One example is
 found in the HONcode of the Health on the Net Foundation. The HON Code of

 Conduct is referenced in Microsoft’s HealthVault Account Privacy Statement.
 It provides guidelines for the ethical dissemination of health information and relies
 on user’s “sense of responsibility” to report health-related websites that deviate
 from this standard (Microsoft Health Vault 2011a, b; HON 2011 ) .



   18.5       De-identi ﬁ cation of Geographic Information Under

         the Privacy Rule and the Institutional Review Board


The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) of 1996
 established a Federal Privacy Rule facilitating more rigorous regulation of the use
 of protected health information (NIH2007). Protected health information rules apply
 to “individually identiﬁable health information” but have not kept up with new data
 available with emerging technology (NIH      2007). The Privacy Rule presently

 identi ﬁ es goraphic subdivisions, including the street address of an individual, as
 data that must be removed from a record, but it does not provide explicit guidance
 around an individual’s given latitude/longitude or personal travel history (2007 ) .
 It is clear that this information could potentially be classiﬁed as a unique identifying
 number (NIH 2007). Since new technologies, including those now found in smart-
 phones, provide ample ways of identifying a person’s location, and numerous

 applications use this information to connect an individual with services, it can be
 very difﬁcult to decouple the individual from their location. Traditionally, statistical
 measures have been employed on datasets, thereby aggregating individual-level
 data securely to a larger administrative boundary. However, data can also be aared
 to a much smaller area (a grid cell or series of grid cells, the size of whimeieedd

 by the GIS analyst) for analytical purposes. This may or may not provide ample
 protection for the individual, since the grid of cells still needs to be generalized
 enough to not give away sensitivelocation information butgranular enough toprovide
 better deﬁnition than other administrative boundaries.
18  VGI and Public Health: Possibilities and Pitfalls                              337


   There are however ongoing efforts to advocate for such privacy concerns.
The Of ﬁ ce otfhe National Coordinator for Health IT has established a Chief Privacy
Ofﬁcer. This position is responsible for providing advice on the implementation of

technology within HITECH programs and advising the National Coordinator on
privacy issues (ONCHIT     2011). The Health Information Technology for Clinical
and Economic Health (HITECH) Act provides additional protections for health
information already covered by HIPAA. The new protections are geared towards
making information available to the patient and expanding patient rightsto suchinfor-

mation while also protecting disclosures of health information to insurers, business
associates, and marketers without previous patient authorization (ONCHIT 2011 ) .
   Along another front, an institutional reviewboard (IRB) can provide a systematic
check that seeks to protect study subjects from unethical behavior and undue risks.
Ethics standards as spelled out in theNational Institutes of HealthClinical Research

Training state that because human subjects are “a necessary means to the end
of greater knowledge,” that there is the potential for exploitation (NIH       2012 ) .
Geography tells us a lot about study subjects, and the collection of such data and the
enrollment of subjects should periodically be checked, just as it would be for any
other IRB-approved study. Guidelines effectively reduce the risk of this happening.

Informed consent is used to help protect subjects and dictates that subjects clearly
understand and agree to the study’s goals and objectives. Subjects need to have a
clear sense about how information collected about them is used later – something
that is clearly lacking from many privacy statements. Existing protections, as deﬁned
by and provided for a traditional IRB review and approval process, must be able

to take into account such privacy concerns from these emerging technologies.
In particular, individuals sitting on IRB panels must understand the ramiﬁcations
of practitioners collecting geographic data in public health studies and must provide
direction for ensuring that such data collected using VGI cannot be used for

something other than how it was originally intended. The expiration of VGI data or
some other mechanism may be one way to help ensure that data collected for one
purpose is not later repurposed for something else.
   Researchers using VGI must question the risks of tools developed in an environ-
ment that does not require institutional review board (IRB) approval. Preferable

researchers without access to an IRB or similar institution would seek out with a
partner with one that is willing to review their proposed work since IRBs have the
ability to review research projects conducted outside of their organization (FDA
2011). However, it is unlikely that many researchers unafﬁliated with an IRB would
voluntarily seek regulation, partially because IRB review and approval is often a

long process that requires signiﬁcant upfront documentation and – very clearly – the
informed consent of study subjects. It seems unlikely that such stringent measures
would be placed on geographically centered research being performed outside of a
research institution with an IRB.
   Given the history of privacy concerns around public health and the protections

already in place, could a board of GIS professionals serve to provide some oversight
and proactive guidance on the use of such technologies? If those leveraging the
power of VGI will not seek out human subject protection on their own, it may fall
338                                                                   C. Goranson et al.


on the GIS professional to ensure that human subject abuses never take place.
If standards are not put into place, it is likely that real problems with unrestricted
collection of spatial and temporal data will not be uncovered until explored further
by the courts. Use of GPS devices by police is coming under increased scrutiny, but

such inspection is often late (NYT  2012). VGI, when used in public health settings,
must be approached in terms of existing protections and potential for future abuse.
In particular, because VGI providesa mechanism for collectingincreasingly accurate
spatial and temporal data about an individual, privacy must be protected above all.



   18.6       Summary and Conclusions


As geographers and public health practitioners, it is our duty to inform the general
public as to the value of geography. We must educate the general public to the ine  hetr
risks and rewards of sharing geographic information with private companie    nso,npro ﬁ t
organizations, government, and individuals.Location should be viewedas onewould
view their social security number – something over which they should not lose

control nor share broadly with others. When it is shared, it should be with full
disclosure of the risks and – as much as possible – the unintended consequences that
might remain. As it can be common for tools and even data to be used for something
other than originally intended, it is vital to develop an appropriate framework of
recommendations for the collection, analysis, and use of the information. Such

guidelines would provide some mechanism by which the creators of such systems
can be made aware of such concerns while empowering those in the public health
community to identify and address such applications.
   Volunteered geographic information will thrive in an open community largely
because it is, fundamentally, volunteered. However, location-based information

collected on large subsets of the population is largely done without adequate dissc ulroe
to individuals. Unfortunately, it may not be until we see abuses of such technology
that we see a need to further regulate the collection of such data.
   Inherently, one’s location belongs to the individual – not to the cell phone com-
pany, not to the government, nor to any other application provider. Until we treat
identiﬁable information coming from the individual with the adequate level of care

and ensure that individuals understand the ramiﬁcations of providing such location-
based information, it is unlikely that future abuses will be curtailed. In an electronic
age, it is only too easy to accidentally release personally identiﬁable information,
and an individual’s geographic footprint only provides an additional measure by
which it can readily be disseminated.

   Perhaps the easiest approach is to remove the passive monitoring of one’s lotc  ian,
when the beneﬁts to the individual clearly do not outweigh the risks. Location needs
to be treated as privileged information owned ﬁrst and foremost by the individual
and no one else. Active participation in an application that requires geographic
information in order to work correctly still requires receipt of consent, but to what

extent should the individual be able to control and later remove one’s own data from
further analytical use?
 18  VGI and Public Health: Possibilities and Pitfalls                                339

    Institutional review boards clearly show one alternative to vetting the use of

 VGI in research, but, as pointed out earlier in this chapter, the likelihood that all
 applications using location for research purposes would abide by such regulation
 seems remote. Clearly the power must sit with the individual, and the individual

 must be willing and able to exercise some control over their own geographic foot-
 prints. Federal, state, and local initiatives, along with adoption of electronic health
 records by large employers, may make possible successful merger of volunteered

 geographic information and health information technology in a way that does not
 sacriﬁce privacy. The rapidity of the use, acceptance, and development of VGI in
 developing countries is phenomenal. Need for efﬁcient, low-cost, and user-friendly
 technology has outweighed privacy concerns and thus facilitated the adoption of

 VGI for a wide range of uses. Areas that are lacking the necessary infrastructure
 for more common public health informatics deployments can utilize their own
 light-weight, web-based systems across networks that are in place, the cell phone

 network being an example of this. In fact, some countries have better infrastructufroer
 cell phones than sanitation ( The Telegraph      2010). In these scenarios, have we
 sacriﬁced privacy and perhaps data quality for convenience?

    There will surely be abuses of personal geographic information, and there will
 be cases where sharing one’s location or location history will unwittingly implicate
 or otherwise harm an individual, group of individuals, or organizations. The more
 aware public health researchers, geographers, and to a greater extent the general

 public are to the challenges that remain in securing such geographic information,
 the more likely it is that we as practitioners are able to avoid and mitigate future
 damages from such exposure. Personal geographic information should remain under

 the individual’s control, and mechanisms like the HIPPA privacy rule may assist
 individuals in understanding not only their rights but how important personal informa-
 tion is used (DHHS 2011 ) .


  Acknowledgments The authors would like to thank the New York City Department of Health
 and Mental Hygiene (NYC DOHMH) for contributions and feedback on this chapter. Christopher
 Goranson works for the Parsons Institute for Information Mapping, of The New School, and
 previously worked for the NYC DOHMH. Sayone Thihalolipavan works for the NYC DOHMH,
 and Nicolás di Tada works for Innovative Support to Emergencies Diseases and Disasters
 (InSTEDD).




   References


Ars Technica. (2012). “Mobile device privacy act” would prevent secret smartphone monitoring.
    http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/news/2012/01/mobile-device-privacy-act-would-prevent-
    secret-smartphone-monitoring.ars Accessed 31 Jan 2012.
Brownstein, J., Cassa, C., Kohane, I., & Mandl, K. (2005). Reverse geocoding: Concerns about
    patient conﬁdentiality in the display of geospatial health daAMIA Annual Symposium
    Proceedings, 2005 , 905.
 CNET. (2011). Declan McCullagh. Microsoft’s web map exposes phone, PC locations.ttp://news.
    cnet.com/8301–31921_3–20085028–281/microsofts-web-map-exposes-phone-pc-locations/     .
    Accessed 2 Aug 2011.
  340                                                                          C. Goranson et al.


 DHHS (U.S. Department of Health & Human Services). (2011). Understanding health information

     privacy.http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/understanding/index.htm .l ccessed 13 Aug 2011.
 FDA (U.S. Food and Drug Administration). (2011). Institutional review boards frequently asked
     questions – Information sheet.         http://www.fda.gov/RegulatoryInformation/Guidances/
     ucm126420.htm   . Accessed 13 Aug 2011.

 Forbes. (2011). Facebook’s privacy issues are even deeper than we knew.   http://www.forbes.com/
     sites/chunkamui/2011/08/08/facebooks-privacy-issues-are-even-deeper-than-we-knew/           .
     Accessed 14 Aug 2011.
Goodchild, M. (2007). Citizens as sensors: The world of volunteered geography.       GeoJournal,

     69 (4), 211–221.
     Goodchild, M. (2011). Firenze: The Vespucci Inst9ittu    hS.ummer Institute on Geographic
     Information Science.
   Google. (2012)O .ne policy, one Google experience . http://www.google.com/policies/. Accessed

     30 Jan 2012.
 HON (Health On the Net Foundation). (2011). The HON code of conduct for medical and health
     web sites (HONcode).   http://www.hon.ch/HONcode/Conduct.html. Accessed 6 Aug 2011.
   InSTEDD. (2011G   ).eoChat .http://instedd.org/technologies/geochat/. Accessed 14 Aug 2011.

  Microsoft Health Vault. (2011a). Microsoft HealthVault account privacy statement.https://account.
     healthvault.com/help.aspx?topicid=PrivacyPolicy&culture=en-US    . Accessed 6 Aug 2011.
Microsoft Health Vault. (2011b). Welcome, Google Health users.         http://www.microsoft.com/
     en-us/healthvault/google-health.aspx. Accessed 6 Aug 2011.

 NIH (National Institutes of Health). (2007) Health services research and the HIPAA privacy rule.
      http://privacyruleandresearch.nih.gov/healthservicesprivacy.asp. Accessed 13 Aug 2011.
  NIH (National Institutes of Health). (2012). Clinical research training on-line – Based on a onraetsie
     by E. J. Emanuel, M.D, Ph.D.    http://www.cc.nih.gov/training/training/crt.htm.l Accessed 13

     Jan 2012.
 NYC DOHMH (Department of Health and Mental Hygiene). (2009). Community health survey:
     Survey data on the health of all New Yorkers.     http://www.nyc.gov/html/doh/html/survey/
     survey.shtml. Accessed 13 Aug 2011.

   ODK (OpenDataKit). (2011A).bout .   http://opendatakit.org/about/. Accessed 24 June 2011.
  OGC (Open Geospatial Consortium). (2011). KML – OGC KML.         http://www.opengeospatial.org/
     standards/kml . Accessed 1 Aug 2011.
 ONCHIT (The Ofﬁce of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology). (2010a).

      http://healthit.hhs.gov/portal/server.pt/community/joy_pritts_-_chief_privacy_of ﬁ cer/1798/
     home/17792  . Accessed 13 Aug 2011.
 ONCHIT (The Ofﬁce of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology). (2010b).
     Building trust in health information exchange: Statement on privacy and security.tp://healthit.

     hhs.gov/portal/server.pt?CommunityID=2994&spaceID=11&parentname=CommunityEditor
     &control=SetCommunity&parentid=9&in_hi_userid=11673&PageID=0&space=Community
     Page . Accessed 13 Aug 2011.
 ONCHIT (The Ofﬁce of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology). (2011).

     Draft personal health record (PHR) model notice (2011).   http://healthit.hhs.gov/portal/server.
     pt/community/healthit_hhs_gov__draft_phr_model_notice/1176     . Accessed 5 July 2011.
  Penn State (John A. Dutton e-Education Institute). (2010). Ethics education for geospatialsies-
     als. https://www.e-education.psu.edu/research/projects/gisethics/. Accessed 24 June 2011.

 Smith, L., Goranson, C., Bryon, B., Kerker, B., & Nonas, C. (2011). Developing a supermarket
     need index. In J. A. Mantaay & S. McClafferty (Eds.), Geospatial analysis of environmental
     health(Geotechnologies and the Environment, Vol. 4). Dordrecht/New York: Springer
     Science + Business Media B.V.

  The Telegraph. (2010). India has more mobile phones than toilets: UN report.        http://www.
     telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/asia/india/7593567/India-has-more-mobile-phones-than-
     toilets-UN-report.html. Accessed 18 June 2011.
  NYT N( ew York Times) (2012). Justices say GPS tracker violated privacy rights.p://www.nytimes.
     com/2012/01/24/us/police-use-of-gps-is-ruled-unconstitutional.html. Accessed 30 Jan 2012.
   Chapter 19

VGI in Education: From K-12

to Graduate Studies


    Thomas Bartoschek        and    Carsten Keßler








 AbstractVolunteered geographic information (VGI) is making its way into an

increasingnumber of ﬁelds within geographic information science. This development
has raised a need to cover VGI at various educational levels, which has led to a number
of new classes on VGI ranging from elementary through secondary school to under-
graduate and graduate university curricula. In this chapter, we give an overview of the
state of the art of VGI in education at these different levels. We outline different ways

of introducing VGI in class. Speciﬁcally, we have investigated the long-term effects of
using VGI in education toﬁnd out whether students who have come across VGI in
class remain interested in the topic and engage in the communities. For this purpose,
we have created a survey that was circulated among students of past VGI classes at
different levels. The evaluation of the 202 completed surveys gives an overview of

motivations and impediments with respect to different VGI platforms. We conclude
with recommendations for the future development of curricula covering volunteered
geographic information.



   19.1      Introduction


Geographic information systems (GIS) and applications such as location-based
services have made their way to the general public. Education systems in many
different countries have realized their relevance and potential and have therefore

developed new strategies to implement the use of geographic information as an
integral part of their curricula, mostly starting in secondary schools (Bartoschek
et al.2010). The general aim is to foster competences such as spatial orientation and




  T. Bartoscek) •( C. Keßler
  Institute for Geoinformatics , University of Münster, Münster, Germany
e-mail: bartoschek@uni-muenster.de ; carsten.kessler@gmail.com

D. Sui et al. (eds.), Crowdsourcing Geographic Knowledge: Volunteered Geographic
Information (VGI) in Theory and Practice, DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-4587-2_19,
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
342                                                           T. Bartoschek and C. Keßler


spatial learning and thinking while using GIS as a support system (National Research

Council Committee on Support for Thinking Spatially 2006 ) .
   More recently, volunteered geographic information (VGI) (Goodchild2007 ) has
started playing an increasingly important role in the teaching curricula at different
educational levels, from elementary and secondary schools (together referred to

as K-12 education in this chapter) through undergraduate to graduate classes at
universities. The idea of using VGI in education has already been around since
1995, long before the term volunteered geographic information was coined. At this
time, Al Gore initiated the     Global Learning and Observations to Beneﬁt the
              1
Environment    program (GLOBE) that supports students and teachers in investiga-
tions of environmental issues. GLOBE is still operative and is currently supported
by NASA and the US National Science Foundation, among others. Evidently, this
innovative idea took close to 15 years to be adopted on a broader scale.

   The authors of this chapter have gained experience in teaching at all the men-
tioned levels: Thomas Bartoschek has been coordinating the GI@School          2  program
and worked with students in elementary and secondary schools, mostly through
short projects inthe context of geography or computer science classes and by training

(future) geography teachers. Carsten Keßler has been teaching various classes cover-
ing VGI, including Introduction to GIS and project seminars around OpenStreetMap.
In this chapter, reports on our personal experience teaching these classes serve as an
entry point for detailed review of the current use of VGI in education. We give an

overview of literature on the use of VGI in education, followed by a classiﬁcation of
the multiple ways in which VGI is being used in learning and teaching: (1) students
working with VGI collected by others, (2) students producing VGI, and (3) students

developing VGI-related applications. Based on this classiﬁcation, we give an over-
view of classes covering VGI taught at the K-12 and university levels.
   The main contribution of this chapter, however, is a survey with 202 students
from all age groups that have participated in VGI-related classes at some point.

In this survey, we have investigated the long-term effects of using VGI in education.
We were particularly interested in which VGI projects the students were familiar
with and how they learned about them, in which of them they have already actively
participated and whether they are still doing so, and ﬁnally what their incentives

for participation are. The analysis of the completed surveys has shown interesting
correlations between the given answers and participants’ age and gender, respectively.
These insights can help to improve the curricula for future classes by matching the
motivations for participation of broader student groups.

   In the next section, we give an overview of the literature on VGI in education,
followed by an overview of our personal experience and a classiﬁcation of VGI in
education in Sect. 19.3. We then outline our survey and provide a detailed breakdown
of the results in Sect. 19.4, followed by conclusions in Sect. 19.5 .




 See http://globe.gov/about.
 See http://www.gi-at-school.de.
19  VGI in Education: From K-12 to Graduate Studies                             343


   19.2      Related Work


Education systems all over the world have realized the relevance and potential of

GIScience. New strategies have been developed to include geographic information
as an integral part in the curricula, mostly starting in secondary school (Bartoschek

et al. 2010). Moreover, the use of computers and mobile devices with positioning
technologies such as GPS receivers, smartphones, and tablets in classrooms is
increasing. By connecting both facts, the way for volunteered geographic informa-

tion in K-12 education should be an easy one. However, there are few publications
on the use of VGI in the classroom, and most publications related to VGI in the area
of education focus on OpenStreetMap. The same applies to VGI in undergraduate

and graduate studies.
   An analysis of publications from the Learning with Geoinformation conference

series, held yearly since 2006, shows that VGI-related topics ﬁrst came up in 2009
(4 out of 30 articles) but never reached a high level of articles (see Table 19.1 ) and
were even decreasing again while other topics (GIS, remote sensing, mobile appli-

cations) have remained consistently present.
    Tschirner 2(009 ) speaks about the way from classical wall maps to OpenStreetMap

in geography classrooms but does not give any examples. Wolff and Wolff ( 2009 )
also refer to OpenStreetMap and argue that the use of OSM in school or university
fosters early experience with geodata and geoinformation ancdan be verymotivating.

Stark and Bähler( 2009)present their project Map your World, where Swiss high
school students use PDAs and GPS receivers to contribute to OpenStreetMap and

OpenAddresses, a VGI platform for collecting geocoded address data for analytical
use. Schubert and Bartoschek (2010) introduce a concept for a didactic seminar in
geography education, where VGI (OpenStreetMap again) is a small part of the

curriculum. Wolff and Wolff( 2010)present VGI projects for undergraduates in
geography and history where historical objects, such as monuments, are integrated
into OSM. Andrae et al. (2011) show possibilities of collaborations between univer-

sities and high schools in the creation and application of a web-based portal for POI
collection. Hennig and Vogler( 2011)propose a system for participatory spatial






  Table 19.1reakdown of papers presented at thLearning with Geoinformation conference
series by topic area
       VGI          Web-based Virtual  Remote Geoinfor-        Spatial

       relatedGIS   GIS       globes   sensing matinobile      thinking  Other  Sum
 2006   0        6     1           2        0       2         1        1         3      16

 2007   0        7     5           3        1       5         1        0         0      22
 2008   0        8     2           3        4       2         1        2         1      23
 2009   4        8     2           4        4       1         2        1         4      30
 2010   3        8     1           2        4       2         3        1         3      27

 2010   4        6     3           2        5       2         1        1         3      27
344                                                               T. Bartoschek and C. Keßler


planning, where students in high school and university contribute data via Scribble
Maps to enhance city development processes in Salzburg, Austria.

   An analysis of the titles and abstracts of talks at the annual international
OpenStreetMap conference State of the Map since 2006             4 shows that there were

hardly any education- or learning-related topics, except for the papers presented by
Rieffel (2010,2011) and a talk by Hale2(010) reporting work with US school chd          ilren
mapping their neighborhoods. The OpenStreetMap Wiki offers a page dedicated to5

education where some projects are listed, mostly in high schools. The page deﬁnes
the role of OpenStreetMap as follows:

   OpenStreetMap is being used within education, in schools, universities and colleges in a
   wide range of disciplines. Some projects involve only the use of existing OpenStreetMap
   data and others result in additional data within the OpenStreetMap dataset. The
   OpenStreetMap project has relevance to geography, mathematics, ecology, community

   planning and technology. Students are able to not only observe and record their mapping
   explorations, but can also contribute data to the project. Contributing to OpenStreetMap can
   be used when teaching computing skills, gaining valuable knowledge in the ﬁelds of GIS,
   planning and community development. (OpenStreetMap     2012 )

   Besides that, an OpenStreetMap curriculum           6is being presented that focuses
on introducing the topics that OSM addresses: mapping, open-source technologies,

crowdsourcing, and community efforts. The curriculum consists of four units: State
of Mapping, Crowd Sourcing, Introduction to OpenStreetMap, and Integrating

OpenStreetMap. These can be applied in high school or at the university level. There
is also a page on using OSM in home education.           7Topics such as understanding
maps, experiencing GPS technology, understanding the local environment, and

elementary school lesson plans are brieﬂy outlined.
   OSM also plays a role in another recent education project addressing map design

and complexity. While OSM has generally reached an acceptable level of detail, the
map design addresses adults. The level of complexity and symbology is not suitable
for learning to read and understand maps. The development of map literacy and

spatial understanding of children will beneﬁt from an OSM version designed
speciﬁcally for children, following their perception and representation patterns of

space (Rieffel and Bartoschek 2012 ) .
    Finding courses related to VGI at the university level has turned out to be difﬁcult,
mostly due to course titles and descriptions that do not give insight into all topics

covered in the courses. It is hence impossible to claim completeness for the list of
courses mentioned here; the classes mentioned in the following cover those about
which we could ﬁnd information online.





 See http://scribblemaps.com/.

 See YEAR.stateofthemap.org, e.g., http://2011.stateofthemap.org.
 See http://wiki.osm.org/wiki/Education.
 6
 See http://wiki.osm.org/wiki/Education\ #The_OpenStreetMap_Curriculum.
 See http://wiki.osm.org/wiki/OpenStreetMap_and_Home_Education.
19  VGI in Education: From K-12 to Graduate Studies                                 345

   The City University of New York – School of Public Health offers a graduate

course on GIS in Public Health since 2010, which is mainly dealing with VGI data
collection (Chap. 18by Goranson, this volume). Students spend some time learning
the technology for data collection (GeoChat), select a research question, and collect

data in the ﬁeld using VGI. After preprocessing, the data will be further analyzed in
ArcGIS. In a separate Public Health course, the students set up their own Ushahidi     8
deployments around a research question and solicited participation from the public.

   Since 2010, the Université Paris-Est Marne-la-Vallée (Marne-la-Vallée, France)
offers a weekly course on Production de Données Géographiques Collaboratives
(Production of Collaborative Geographic Data)        foraster’s studentsin information
systems and web applications and in geographic information. It is an introductory

course explaining this new approach to collecting geographic data. The students
revise related work and summarize the main advantages and weakness of this type
of data. The process of contribution to OSM is discussed and tested. In a ﬁnal VGI

development project, some of the students choose to use OSM data and the API
while others choose sources like Google Maps or Géoportail to implement crowd-
sourcing applications.

   In summary, following a review of literature, it has been shown that the current
role of VGI in education, websites, and courses is still a minor one. Very few reenfers
to VGI in K-12 and university education are available, even in GIScience education.
Most of the courses, lectures, and projects on VGI are focused on OpenStreetMap,

not taking into account the variety of available applications.
   In the next section, we will outline our personal experience teaching classes
related to VGI at the Institute for Geoinformatics, University of Münster.





   19.3       VGI in the IFGI Curriculum

                                                            9
The Institute for Geoinformatics at University of Münster (IFGI) is one of Europe’s
biggest research and education centers in theﬁeld of GIScience.The course program
covers both BSc and MSc programs in geoinformatics. Additionally, there is an

international MSc in Geospatial Technologies and a graduate school offering an
international PhD program on semantic integration of geospatial information.          10
IFGI offers numerous GI-related courses for students in other programs, such as
computer science, landscape ecology, geography, or didactics of geography.

   Moreover, IFGI started a high school education and cooperation initiative called
GI@School in 2006. GI@School has developed from a student-driven initiative into




 8
 See http://www.ushahidi.com/.
 See http://ifgi.uni-muenster.de/.
 See http://irtg-sigi.uni-muenster.de/.
346                                                        T. Bartoschek and C. Keßler


an integrated part of the curriculum and project work at IFGI with the purpose to
transfer fundamental and hands-on knowledge in geoinformatics to K-12 education.
It has established a functioning network of schools, teachers, and students, where
the exchange with public authorities, industry partners, and partnerships with local

schools plays an important role. In addition, the GI@School project develops teach-
ing and learning modules on geoinformatics for schools. These modules can be
integrated into class units of different lengths (90 min up to full project days or
weeks) being held in schools or at IFGI. VGI is one of the key topics in GI@
School’s work.

   The experience with VGI in IFGI’s educational work at the K-12, undergraduate,
and graduate levels, as well as from works presented in the related work section,
allows us to deﬁne a certain classiﬁcation of the ways on how VGI can be used in
learning and teaching. The simplest and most oftenﬁrst contact with VGI (also
shown in the survey) is when students are working with VGI collected by others (1).
This might be when browsing on the OpenStreetMap website, analyzing geotags

from Flickr, or even importing vector data from OpenStreetMap into a GIS environ-
ment for further analysis. A different case of use is when students are producing
VGI (2) as in data collection and submission for OpenStreetMap or geotagging of
Flickr pictures. In the last case, students maybe developingVGI-relatedapplications
(3), where available VGI is part of the application (as base map, as POIs) or where

the application is made for VGI collection:
  1.    Working with VGI collected by others:

   (a) Using products based on this VGI (e.g., map from OpenStreetMap)
     (b)   Using this VGI to create other products (e.g., in a GIS)

  2.    Producing VGI:

   (a) Collecting data in the ﬁeld and submitting them to OSM
     (b)   Enriching existing nonspatial information (e.g., geotagging)

  3.    Developing applications:

     (a)   based on VGI (as in 1)
     (b)   for VGI collection (as in 2)

We will refer to this classiﬁcation in further sections, where we present examples of
VGI-related activities at IFGI.



   19.3.1      VGI in K-12 Education


VGI plays a major role in the approach GI@School takes for K-12 education. Some
of the practical modules of GI@School, being held in high schools, cover the
underlying principles and practical use of GPS technology. Asﬁrst actions to

implement VGI modules after introducing GPS, we started with OpenStreetMap
19  VGI in Education: From K-12 to Graduate Studies                                 347

mapping parties and mapped the school ground and surroundings with the students

(2a). They were divided into groups that would each adopt one part of the area to be
mapped. The groups annotated their mapped points and tracks with paper and pencil.
Back in class, we used the Java OpenStreetMap Editor to annotate and upload the

data to OpenStreetMap. Seeing the mapped features appear on the OpenStreetMap
website after some minutes was very motivating for the students, as they immedi-
ately received feedback about their successful contribution to the project. Over the

last 3 years, we have organized 12 mapping parties in German high schools and 8 on
an international level (India, Rwanda, Brazil) and have reached around 800 high
school students.
   Since 2009, we have organized some project weeks with the focus on web-based
                                                              12
VGI projects. One outstanding result is the platform TiMiC        (iMiC is Mobility in
Cities). It was implemented in 2009 by a group of high school students working at
IFGI once a week for 2–3 h over the course of 4 months. This VGI-based system

allows users to submit trafﬁc events, such as accidents or road works, via SMS to
the system, which then appear on a Google Map interface (3b). The students partici-
pated in a national competition and won the ﬁrst prize for IT-related projects.
                                                         13
   In the GeospatialLearning@PrimarySchool project, children of ages 6–12 work
with the XO laptop, developed by the One Laptop Per Child (OLPC) initiative, and
a connected GPS receiver to map geographic features such as trees, water, and veg-
etation. Due to XO laptop’s capability to create ad hoc networks, the children can

collaboratively work on the data collection. While tagging outdoors, they see each
other on a digital map (from OpenStreetMap) and see their tagging activities, so they
collaboratively create a map of the surrounding area (1a, 2a). The collected data can

be exported to KML and integrated into other systems (1b).



   19.3.2       VGI in Undergraduate Programs


In undergraduate classes, VGI has been a central topic over the last 2 years in the

Introduction to GIS class taught every semester at IFGI. This is a compulsory class
for allﬁrst-semester geoinformatics bachelor students, as well as third-semester
geography and landscape ecology bachelor students. Due to the broad range of

student backgrounds and the spectrum of topics around GIS covered in this class,
the coverage of VGI is limited to OpenStreetMap. The students learn about the
organization of the OpenStreetMap community and      how the datais collected(1a,2a).
The more technical aspects cover the structure of the OpenStreetMap ﬁles and the

versioning approach taken in OpenStreetMap. Our experience suggests that this part



 1See http://josm.openstreetmap.de.
 12
  See http://www.timic.de.
 1See http://52north.org/GeospatialLearning.
348                                                         T. Bartoschek and C. Keßler


is challenging for most students, as most of them do not have any experience with
the eXtensible Markup Language (XML).
   The Introduction to GIS class is a combined lecture and lab, where the students
have to solve practical tasks every week and do hands-on work in groups of two.

The tasks for the VGI lecture are to register to OpenStreetMap and add several
features using one of the web-based editors. By completing these tasks, the students
see how editing works and what different types of features can be created. Speciﬁcally,
they learn how the tagging process works, including checking the OpenStreetMap
Wiki for the current consensus on the tags to use for the features they add (2b).

Recording and uploading GPS tracks are not part of the class; instead, the students
learn how to import the OpenStreetMap data into ArcGIS and how to combine the
data with other data (1b). This way, the students also learn about both the advantages
and disadvantages of using VGI in their project, namely, that OpenStreetMap offers
data that are hardly available from any other easily accessible source but that the
accuracy and completeness may vary from one area to another (and even from one

feature to another). From most students, we get positive feedback about the VGI
lecture. Especially the fact that their own added data is almost immediately shown on
the main OpenStreetMap website is very motivating for the students.



   19.3.3       VGI in Graduate Studies


At the graduate level, VGI has become an important part of the curriculum for the
MSc students in geoinformatics and the Erasmus Mundus students for the MSc in
geospatial technologies at IFGI. While these classes are in principle open to
students from other programs, students from other programs hardly ever participate
in classes related to VGI, probably due to the technical nature of these course offer-

ings. Most graduate classes related to VGI are organized as study projects, which
have the goal to develop a software project over the course of the semester in small
teams of three to ﬁve students. One of the recent study projects was also centered on
OpenStreetMap. No speciﬁc task was given, though, so that the ﬁrst task during the
semester was to form groups of three to ﬁve and come up with an innovative project
that is realistic to implement by the team within the given time frame.

   The four projects implemented by the teams showed an impressive range of ideas.
Team one developed a web application for smartphones that allows users to tag points
of interest on the go (3b). Team two implemented a service that allows users to print
maps out of OpenStreetMap for hiking orbiking trips (3a), includingthe calculated
route (Fritze et al.011). The service automatically generates a multipage PDF ﬁle

from a given GPS track (i.e., the planned route) and optimizes the print layout around
the track. Team three came up with the idea for an indoor counterpart for
OpenStreetMap called OpenFloorMap (Lasnia et al. 2011 ) . Their implementation
consists of an Android app to measure rooms using smartphone sensors and a web
application that allows users to integrate their room measurements into an existing
19   VGI in Education: From K-12 to Graduate Studies
                                                                                     349

building model (3b). This project is still developed furtherand will alsobe the subject

of an upcoming graduate class. Finally, team four adapted the idea developed for
LinkedGeoData (Auer et al. 2011), which provides the OpenStreetMap data as a
semantically annotated Linked Data set. Oneshortcoming of LinkedGeoData at the
time of the study project 15 was that it was never up to date, as the dataset was rebuilt

infrequently from an OpenStreetMap dump. The team therefore built a live wrapper
that provides a semantically annotated view of the current state of the OpenStreetMap
dataset (3b), including querying and annotation capabilities (Trame et al.2011 ) .
    The approach to let the students develop their own project ideas, instead of giving

them a prepared task, led to a set of innovative and diverse projects that the students
really identiﬁed with. The general level of motivation was very high. As the refer-
ences above show, three out of thefour projects have ledto a conferencepublication.
The students therefore did not only engage with their software project but also

learned how the submission and reviewing process of a conference works, which
was a new experience for most of them. On the development side, the students
acquired consummate skills in generating, handling, and processing VGI.



   19.3.4        Application Development and Testing


A recent study project on geospatial learning has produced two VGI-related
prototypes that focus on the use in schools. In the “Participatory App,” school

children can mark points of interest related to one topic (chosen collaboratively or
by the teacher) on a map, based on OpenStreetMap. This can happen on a desktop
PC in class, where they tag places they know about, or with a mobile device with
GPS (3b). Scenarios under consideration are marking dangerous trafﬁc situations

on their way to school or places where they ﬁnd trash in public or parks. These data,
collected by several classes or schools, are a valuable input to the city council,
pointing them to littered parks, for example. This canbe an incentivefor the children
to participate, as their work can change their living conditions.

   A second group presented a tool for educational geotagging (3b) in school.
Here, the teacherhas to prepare appropriate feature descriptions which will be auto-
matically integrated into the system. The students developed an XML ﬁle for tree
classiﬁcation. Geotagging happens in the ﬁeld with a mobile device. The children

approach a tree and click a button in the system, which marks their position on
a map. A wizard, generated from the tree XMLﬁle, leads the user through the
classiﬁcation process by asking questions (“Is it a broad-leafed tree or a conifer?”)

and showing pictures of leaf types. By answering a series of such questions, they
get to the exact tree classiﬁcation and also learn about the classiﬁcation process.


 14
  http://www.open ﬂ oormap.org
 1LinkedGeoData ( http://linkedgeodata.org) also provides a life wrapper now.
 350                                                       T. Bartoschek and C. Keßler


 Usability tests were conducted with elementary and high school children for both
 applications, where user interface problems could be solved. The test participants
 revealed that they were highly motivated in the data collection process. An ongoing
 project on “Educational Map Apps” will present more VGI prototypes of this kind
 for smartphones or tablets.

    In this chapter, we have outlined IFGI’s education activities, referring to the incorpo-
 ration of VGI across multiple education levels, from K-12 to graduate studies. We have
 introduced a classiﬁcation for the integration of VGI in education and have classiﬁed
 IFGI’s activities into courses and projects where (1) students work with VGI collected
 by others, (2) students produce VGI, and (3) students develop VGI-related applications.
 We have shown that a broad implementation of VGI activities is possible and can be

 integrated into curricula on all levels. We have presented synergies in VGI application
 development in graduate studies for use in undergraduate and K-12 education.



   19.4       Survey and Evaluation


The goal of the web-based survey presented in this section was toﬁnd out more
 about the impacts of the use of VGI in education. The participants were high school
 and university students who have already worked with VGI in some form, either
 through the GI@School program (K-12) or in undergraduate and graduate classes.
 We were particularly interested in the inﬂuence of educational use of VGI on their

 knowledge about and current use of VGI.



   19.4.1       Survey Design


The questionnaire consisted of 15 multiple choice questions and was divided into
 ﬁve parts. Questions 1–5 and 15 focused on personal information, such as age, gender,
 educational background (high school or university), the favorite/main subjects
 (for high school students) or theﬁeld of study (for university students), and the
 private use of social networks with the possibility to share location information

 (such as “check-ins”). Questions 6 and 7 asked if the participants are familiar with
 different VGI applications and how and in which context they got to know them.
 Taking into account that the term VGI is not very common, especially in high
 school and undergraduate classes, we asked these and further questions in the form
 of a matrix, presenting seven common VGI applications. We decided on photo
geotagging platforms (giving the examples of Flickr, Picasa, and Panoramio),

 OpenStreetMap, Wikimapia   , GeoCommons, Google My Maps, Google Building
 Maker/SketchUp, and CrisisMappers. Questions 8–10 and 12 focused on motiva-
 tion, incentives, and impact in the use and contribution of VGI; question 11 asked
 about the usability of the mentioned VGI applications, and questions 13 and 14
 asked about the students’ opinion on the use and contribution of VGI in education.
19  VGI in Education: From K-12 to Graduate Studies                             351


   19.4.2      Participants


At the K-12 level, the questionnaire was sent out to ten German schools that participated
in IFGI’s GI@School program and worked with VGI (mostly in the form of OSM
mapping parties). Two additional German schools were contacted via the OSM
education projects website. At the undergraduate and graduate levels, students attending

VGI-related classes at IFGI were contacted. These were students in the Geoinform-
atics (BSc, MSc), Geospatial Technologies (MSc), Landscape Ecology (BSc, MSc),
Geography (BSc, MSc, MEd), and Computer Science (BSc, MSc) programs. The
survey link was also sent to international colleagues teaching VGI-related courses.
   In total, 202 students participated in the study, of which 26.5% were female.
Thirty-three percent of the participants were in high school; the remaining 67%

of students were in university. Most participants from high school mentioned
mathematics or geography as their main or favorite subjects, while languages and
computer science were not very common (see Fig. 19.1). Over 50% of the partici-
pants at the university level are enrolled in courses closely related to GIScience
(Geoinformatics and Geospatial Technologies) (see Fig. 19.2 ).



   19.4.3      Evaluation


OpenStreetMap is the best known VGI application to the survey participants; only
4% of the participants did not know this project. Due to strong use of OpenStreetMap
in IFGI’s education activities, this seems to be obvious: 70% of the participants had

their ﬁrst contact to OSM in high school or in university. In comparison, Wikimapia,
GeoCommons, and CrisisMappers are not very known to the participants: 65%,
68%, and 85%, respectively, did not know these platforms (see Fig.    19.3 ). These
three seem to be particularly new for the high school students: 77% (Wikimapia),
96% (GeoCommons), and 100% (CrisisMappers) had not come across these plat-
forms before. It is noticeable that photo geotagging platforms and Google My Maps

were discovered in their spare time by close to 50% of the participants and by less
than 20% in the education context.
   As OpenStreetMap seems to be the most commonly used VGI application in
education, we take a closer look into the educational use. In high school,
OpenStreetMap is being used mainly in projects and regular lessons (2a) by the

participants. At the university level, projects and introductory classes are also the
most common cases of use, but thesis work and other contexts also seem to be
relevant (see Fig. 19.4). This may be due to the fact that the use of OpenStreetMap
data (1a) and software development based on OpenStreetMap (3a, 3b) are being
fostered at IFGI. Nonetheless, a large partof the participants used(1a) or contributed

(2a) to OpenStreetMap in a private context.
   The main motivation for using and contributing to OpenStreetMap is education,
as already found out in question 7. But otherhighly rated motivationsare the general
interest in the project (30%) and the belief in the social impact of OSM (17%).
352                                                          T. Bartoschek and C. Keßler



















 Fig. 19.1Favorite and main subjects of K-12 students (N = 63)



























 Fig. 19.2Study programs of university students (N = 106)


Wikimapia, GeoCommons, and CrisisMappers were not known to most of the

participants. Most participants had “just tried out” geotagging photos and Google
My Maps. Besides OpenStreetMap, Google SketchUp and the Building Maker were
used by 33% of the participants in an educational context (see Table 19.2 ).
   A closer look at the participants’ behavior after working with VGI in school or

university reveals that a high number of participants have never used the platforms
again. In particular, CrisisMappers (85.7%), Wikimapia (71.4%), and GeoCommons
(74.5%) were hardly ever used again.
19  VGI in Education: From K-12 to Graduate Studies                                 353



























 Fig. 19.3“Which of these projects/applications do you know and how did youﬁnd out about
them?” (N = 156)

























 Fig. 19.4Context of interaction with OpenStreetMap (N = 145)



 Table 19.2Education as a motivation for VGI use and contribution
Answer options                      Education (abs.)  Education (rel.) (%)   Responses

Geotagged photos                      20                 15.0                    133
OpenStreetMap                        76                  38.8                     196

Wikimapia                            11                  13.6                    81
GeoCommons                           15                  20.5                    73
Google My Maps                        23                  20.0                   115

Google Building Maker/SketchUp        31                  31.3                    99
CrisisMappers                         3                   5.2                    58
354                                                          T. Bartoschek and C. Keßler






















 Fig. 19.5 Frequency of project activity after educational use



   In comparison, OpenStreetMap reaches only low numbers. Of the participants,

24.1% have never used OSM again after their contact with the application in an
educational context. OSM is to be seen as the most positive example, as 20.3% of
the participants still use it regularly, 16.5% once in a while, and 27.8% use it some-
times. Photo geotagging platforms (50%) and Google My Maps (40%) are still used

by nearly half of the participants more than once after educational contact (see
Fig. 19.5 ).
   Seeing the educational background is interesting in the case of OSM. There are
big differences between high school and university students in terms of likelihood
of further use. While 75.6% of the university students worked more than once with

OSM after contact in education, only 46.3% of the high school students did so (see
Fig. 19.6 ).
    Figure19.7 shows the reasons for ceasing or continuing to contribute to the VGI
platforms. It only takes the participants into account that stopped after educational

use. Participants who never used the platform or still use it were ignored in this
analysis. OSM and Google SketchUp/Building Maker are being considered as too
time consuming by around 20% of the participants. OpenStreetMap seems to be the
most complicated platform to contribute to; this reason was given by 19.2% of the

participants. Privacy issues are a relevant reason for photo geotagging platforms and
Google My Maps, but the most striking reason is the missing revenue for the partici-
pants, chosen by 40–50% for all platforms.
   This leads to the question of which incentives would get students at the high
school or university level to participate in and contribute to VGI projects in general.

Better usability is the highest rated incentive (62.8%), followed by friends being
active in the same project (47.3%).More acceptance and ackno    wledgement insociety
 Fig. 19.6Frequency of OpenStreetMap activity after educational use, compared to level of edu     ticoan

(N = 130)































 Fig. 19.7“Which incentives would make you participate in the projects/applications mentioned
before?” (N = 121)
356                                                          T. Bartoschek and C. Keßler

























 Fig. 19.8 Usability ratings for use and contribution



do not seem to be very importanftor the participants (28.9%).Financial compensation
is interesting for the participants at this point as well (43%), but a closer look reveals
some major differences in gender (see Fig. 19.7). Financial compensation seems to

be particularly important for male participants (51.8%), but not for female (23.7%).
Female participants stress the importance of usability (73.7% vs. 57.8%).
   A closer look at the perceived complexity of the aforementioned VGI platforms
shows that few participants ﬁnd the platforms very complicated to use. CrisisMappers
is only considered to be “okay” to “very complicated” (on a 5-step scale, ranging

from “very simple” to “very complicated”) but was only known by 12 participants.
Google SketchUp/Building Maker has quite similar values. Only 17.7% of the par-
ticipants considered it being simple or very simple. In contrast, the photo geotag-
ging platforms and Google My Maps are considered simple or very simple by 73.6%

and 63.2% of the participants, respectively. OpenStreetMap, known and used by
most of the participants (120), was rated complicated or very complicated by only
18.3% (see Fig. 19.8 ).
   The last questions referred to the use of VGI in education in general as a quanti-

tative and qualitative measure. Fifty-two percent of the participants think that VGI
data and applications are being used too little or far too little in education, while
41.5% think its coverage in education is just right. It has to be taken into account
that the participants were recruited from groups that were exposed to VGI at a rela-
tive high level (GI@School students, IGFI students). This is not very common,

especially in K-12 education, also in undergraduate and graduate studies, as shown
in the related work section. Of the participants, 70.2% think that the use of and
19  VGI in Education: From K-12 to Graduate Studies                              357


learning with VGI in education make sense or make a lot of sense, which conﬁrms
the importance of our efforts to include these projects in education. In both ques-
tions, the results were very similar for high school students and university students
and for male and female students.

   In summary, the results of the survey indicate that there is still signiﬁcant room
for improvement for the long-term effects of VGI in education. The majority of
students does not engage in any of the bigger VGI communities after their contact
with VGI in class. This picture contradicts our own impressions sketched in
Sect. 19.3 – VGI is always a topic for which students are highly motivated. In the

end, there seems to be a signiﬁcant difference between activities that are fun in class
and activities that are fun in one’s spare time.
   The questions on usability and motivations give an indication of how long-term
engagement could be increased, namely, by (1) making the tools less complicated
and hence more accessible for less tech-savvy users and (2) increasing the user base.
While usability is a technology issue that is constantly improving, the user base will

eventually get broader over time as VGI becomes more of a mainstream topic.
Easier to use interfaces should also ﬂatten the learning curve and should make the
VGI communities more accessible for less tech-savvy users.



   19.5      Conclusions


Looking at the emergent impact of VGI in society and science (Haklay 2010 ) , it is
surprising that the topics and methods concerned with VGI are integrated into

curricula only slowly and only to a limited extent, as shown in the related work
section. The Institute for Geoinformatics has put a focus on VGI-related education
and partly developed aﬂow, where students in graduate programs develop VGI
applications, undergraduate students are exposed to VGI data analysis, and K-12
students work on data collection (see Sect.19.3). The K-12 students act as usability

testers of newly developed applications by IFGI students and contribute to scientiﬁc
projects as data collectors or as part of participative planning processes (see
Sect. 19.3.4). An integrative approach to university-school cooperation as a means
to bring VGI to educational use, as presented here, seems to be a good solution,
as curriculum development is a rather slow and inﬂexible process. VGI applications
are often not known to teachers or even students in GIScience-related programs, as

the survey has shown. To formalize the multiple ways VGI can be used in learning
and teaching, a classiﬁcation of use cases was presented: (1) students working with
VGI collected by others, (2) students producing VGI, and (3) students developing
VGI-related applications. These three classes can be subdivided in different contexts
as shown in Sect. 19.3 .

   The conducted survey (Sect.    19.4) revealed that OpenStreetMap is the most
known VGI application among the participants. Since IFGI’s VGI-related education
efforts are often based on OSM, this seems to be obvious. However, OSM is also
one of the applications that offers more than just data collection. Due to easy access
358                                                           T. Bartoschek and C. Keßler


























 Fig. 19.9Social network use among the participants (N = 117)


to the raw data (under a Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 2.0 license), it
can be used in various ways: as a geodata source, for data quality analysis, as a base
map in other applications, or for studies in cartography (Rieffel and Bartoschek
2012). This makes OSM an extremely ﬂexible tool in education, also shown in the

variety of educational contexts in which it is already being used (see Fig. 19.4 ).
   VGI has already found its way into the experience of a major part of the students.
Photo geotagging applications and Google My Maps are being used in spare time

by nearly 50% of the survey participants. This shows a general acceptance of par-
ticipation in and contribution of geographic information. However, the further use
of and contribution to VGI-related applications after the contact in school or univer-
sity are still quite low. It seems to be difﬁcult to keep the students contributing,

especially in the K-12 context (Fig. 19.6). The missing revenue (Fig. 19.7 ) shows
that teachers should emphasize the impact and importance of VGI and especially
OpenStreetMap in society. Options to reach this goal could be focusing on
                                                                             16
applications in developing countries and for humanitarian activities.          Another
aspect, especially in education, is the use of participatory VGI applications, where
VGI can beused as an instrument in planning processes. This is a strong motiva-
tion in the educational context. The students know that all their work around VGI

(from collection and submission to use) makes sense and will be used for a good
purpose that they will beneﬁt from. A closer look at the incentives (Figs.19.8 ,19.9 )


 16
 See http://hot.openstreetmap.org/
 19   VGI in Education: From K-12 to Graduate Studies                                   359

 implies that VGI platforms still need to improve their usability. The activity of

 friends or integration into social networks is important and feasible as well, in
 contrast to ﬁnancial compensation. Seeing the participants’ strong activity in social
 networks (see Fig.   19.9), one could assume that some kind of a mixed form of VGI
 and social network platform could keep the students on track with contribution.

    From the educator’s perspective, we can say that working with and contributing
 to VGI projects are a very encouraging part of class. One can ﬁnd several modern
 learning paradigms in this activity.

    In the constructionism theory, based on Piaget’s constructivism theory of child-
 hood learning (Piaget1926), children learn by doing and making in a public, guided,
 collaborative process including feedback from peers, not just from teachers. Students
 explore and discover instead of only consuming prepared knowledge (Papert and

 Harel 1991). Papert states that this happens “especially felicitously in a context
 where the learner is consciously engaged in constructing a public entity.” It is meant
 to see learning as “building knowledge structures.” In our case, the meaningful

 product is VGI; it is created through a collaborative process, and there is feedback
 of a whole community.
     As constructionism may be a rather extreme approach to learning, situated learn-
 ing may ﬁt better the educational reality. Here learning is a product of an activity,

 context, and culture, wherein realistic tasks shall be carried out collaboratively
 (Brown et al. 1989). Situated learning with VGI also brings the educational and the
 computational worlds together and leads to modern computational approaches, such
 as situated computing. Situated computing can be understood as a paradigm for

 mobile computer users based on their physical context and activities carried out as
 a part of their daily life (Hirakawa and Hewagamage         2001). The growing use of
 mobile devices in education, even at the K-12 level, is also a foundation for future

 VGI applications in education, where the whole process of data collection, data
 processing, and use of VGI can be carried out in the ﬁeld.




   References


  Andrae, S., Erlacher, C., Paulus, G., Gruber, G., Gschliesser, H., Moser, P., Sabitzer, K., & Kiechle,
    G. (2011). OpenPOI – Developing a web-based portal with high school students to collabora-
    tively collect and share points-of-interest data. In T. Jekel, A. Koller, K. Donert, & R. Vogler
    (Eds.), Learning with geoinformation 2011 (pp. 66–69). Berlin: Wichmann Verlag.
 Auer, S., Lehmann, J., & Hellmann, S. (2011). LinkedGeoData: Adding a spatial dimension to
    the web of data. In ISWC’09: Proceedings of the 8th International Semantic Web Conference
    (pp. 731–746). Berlin/Heidelberg (2009): Springer-Verlag.
    Bartoschek, T., Bredel, H., & Forster, M. (2010). GeospatialLearning@PrimarySchool: A minimal

    GIS approach. In R. Purves, & R. Weibel (Eds.), GIScience 2010 extended abstracts, sixth
    international conference on Geographic Information Science . Zurich, Switzerland. http://
    www.giscience2010.org/pdfs/paper_166.pdf  .
Brown, J., Collins, A., & Duguid, P. (1989). Situated cognition and the culture of learning.
    Educational researcher ,18 (1), 32ff.
  360                                                                 T. Bartoschek and C. Keßler


 Fritze, H., Demuth, D., Knoppe, K., & Drerup, K. (2011). Track based OSM print maps. In A.

     Schwering, E. Pebesma, & K. Behncke (Eds.), Geoinformatik 2011: Geochange (Vol. 41 of
     ifgiprints. Münster, Germany). Heidelberg: AKA.
Goodchild, K. (2007). Citizens as sensors: The world of volunteered geography.        GeoJournal,
     69 (4), 211–221.

  Haklay, M. (2010, September).Geographical citizen science – Clash of cultures and new opportu-
     nities. Position paper for GIScience workshop on the role of VGI in advancing science, Zurich,
     Switzerland.
  Hale, K. (2010, August).OSM used in a high school environment. Presentation at State of the Map

     US Conference 2010, Atlanta, GA.    http://www.vimeo.com/14592993.
  Hennig, S., & Vogler, R. (2011). Participatory tool development for participatory spatial planning –
     The GEOKOM-PEP environment. In T. Jekel, A. Koller, K. Donert, & R. Vogler (Eds.),
     Learning with geoinformation 2011. Berlin: Wichmann Verlag.

  Hirakawa, M., & Hewagamage, K. P. (2001). Situated computing: A paradigm for the mobile user-
     interaction with multimedia sources. Annals of Software Engineering, 12 (1), 213–239.
Lasnia, D., Westermann, A., Tschorn, G., Weiss, P., & Ogundele, K. (2011). OpenFloorMap
     implementation. In A. Schwering, E. Pebesma, & K. Behncke (Eds.),       Geoinformatik 2011:

     Geochange (Vol. 41 of ifgiprints. Münster, Germany). Heidelberg: AKA.
 National Research Council Committee on Support for Thinking Spatially. (2006).       Learning to
     think spatially. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
 OpenStreetMap. (2012). Wiki page on education .     http://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Education.

     Accessed 26 Jan 2012.
Papert, S., & Harel, I. (1991). Situating constructionism. In   Constructionism(p. 1). Norwood:
     Ablex Publishing Corporation.
    Piaget, J. (192T)h.e child’s conception of the world. New York: Harcourt Brace & World.

  Rieffel, P. (2010, July).Openstreetmap on OLPC XO-laptops in primary schools. State of the Map
     Conference, Girona, Spain.
  Rieffel, P. (2011, September). Assessing learning aspects in digital maps – Using VGI to create a
     child suitable map. State of the Map Conference, Denver, CO.

  Rieffel, P., & Bartoschek, T. (2012, March)I.nvestigating cognitive aspects in digital maps – Using
     VGI to create a child suitable map. GI Zeitgeist Conference Proceedings, Münster, Germany.
  Schubert, J., & Bartoschek, T. (2010). Geoinformation im geographieunterricht – konzeption eines
     fachdidaktischen seminars an der universität Münster. In T. Jekel, A. Koller, K. Donert, &

     R. Vogler (Eds.), Learning with geoinformation (Vol. 5). Berlin: Wichmann Verlag.
  Stark, H., & Bähler, L. (2009). Map your world – Schüler erfassen freie und offene geodaten. In T.
     Jekel, A. Koller, K. Donert, & R. Vogler (Eds.),Learning with geoinformation (Vol. 4). Berlin:
     Wichmann Verlag.

 Trame, J., Rieffel, P., Tas, U., Baglatzi, A., & von Nathusius, V. (2011). LOSM – A lightweight
     approach to integrate OpenStreetMap into the web of data. In A. Schwering, E. Pebesma, &
     K. Behncke (Eds.),Geoinformatik 2011: Geochange (Vol. 41 ofifgiprints. Münster, Germany).
     Heidelberg: AKA.

  Tschirner, S. (2009). GIS in deutschen klassenzimmern – von der Wandkarte zu Openstreetmap.
     In T. Jekel, A. Koller, K. Donert, & R. Vogler (Eds.), Learning with Geoinformation (Vol. 4).
     Berlin: Wichmann Verlag.
 Wolff, P., & Wolff, V. (2009). Öffentliche Projekte für öffentliche karten. In T. Jekel, A. Koller,

     K. Donert, & R. Vogler (Eds.),   Learning with Geoinformation (Vol. 4). Berlin: Wichmann
     Verlag.
 Wolff, P., & Wolff, V. (2010). Über OpenStreetMap (OSM) stadt- und kulturgeschichte erleben.
     In T. Jekel, A. Koller, K. Donert, & R. Vogler (Eds.), Learning with geoinformation (Vol. 5).

     Berlin: Wichmann Verlag.
   Chapter 20

Prospects for VGI Research and the Emerging

Fourth Paradigm



   Sarah Elwood       ,  Michael F. Goodchild        , and   Daniel Sui








 Abstract This concluding chapter reﬂects on some of the core themes that crosscut
the contributed chapters, and further outlines some of the stimulating and signiﬁcant

relationships between volunteered geographic information (VGI) and the discipline
of geography. We argue that future progress in VGI research depends in large part
on building strong linkages with a diversity of geographic scholarship. We situate
VGI research in geography’s core concerns with space and place and offer several

ways of addressing persistent challenges of quality assurance in VGI. We develop
an argument for further research on the heterogeneous social relations through
which VGI is produced and their implications for participation, power, and collec-
tive or civic action. The ﬁnal two sections, closely related, position VGI as part of a
shift toward hybrid epistemologies and potentially a fourth paradigm of data-

intensive inquiry across the sciences.



      20.1      Retrospective

Looking back over the chapters of this book, we are struck ﬁrst and foremost by the

diversity of work represented and the many research directions the authors have
chosen to pursue. Contributions range from computational geography to education,



  S. Elwo*d) (
  Department of Geography, University of Washington , Seattle , WA , USA
e-mail: selwood@u.washington.edu
  M. F. Goodchild
Department of Geography, University of California at Santa Barbara,
 Santa Barbara , CA , USA
e-mail: good@geog.ucsb.edu

D. Sui
  Department of Geography, The Ohio State University, Columbus , OH , USA
e-mail: sui.10@osu.edu

D. Sui et al. (eds.), Crowdsourcing Geographic Knowledge: Volunteered Geographic
Information (VGI) in Theory and Practice, DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-4587-2_20,
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
362                                                                    S. Elwood et al.


from Web demographics to public health, and from the social construction of place
to the place of volunteered geographic information (VGI) in China. Many interesting
and exciting issues emerge and prompt us to offer some thoughts in this ﬁnal chapter
on the prospects for future VGI research. While some might see VGI as a ﬂash in

the pan, a sideshow in the broader currents sweeping society, we believe neverthe-
less that it represents a very signiﬁcant development for the discipline of geography
and for the production of geographic information in general. In what follows, we
explore several potential directions for VGI research. We have no desire to offer a
prescription, and our discussion reﬂects no more than our personal perspectives; but

by offering a discussion, we hope to stimulate further reﬂection and creative thinking
about the future of the ﬁeld.
   Some, but by no means all, of the chapters of the book have been written by
geographers, and all three of the editors hold appointments in academic depart-
ments of geography. To us, this makes very good sense: as with any area of research
concerned with geographic information, VGI stands in the borderland between

several disciplines, including computer science and several of the social sciences.
Many of the issues surrounding VGI are common to other forms of user-generated
content and are best studied in a broad context. But other issues are speciﬁc to the
geographic nature of VGI and thus are best addressed within a framework of
geographic knowledge and theory. In what follows, we explore some of the more

stimulating relationships between VGI research and the discipline of geography,
believing that progress depends in part on building stronger linkages with the accu-
mulated body of geographic knowledge.
   The next section follows such a strategy closely, by linking VGI research to the
traditional dichotomy in geography between space and place (Tuan      1977 ) , arguing

that in contrast to much previous work in geographic information science (GIScience)
and its concern with space, VGI research invites a more place-centric perspective and
may even stimulate the development of a parallel, platialgeographic information
system. The second substantive section addresses the topic of VGI quality, a perennial
topic in the ﬁeld and one that surfaces in several of the chapters of this book. We argue

in this section that quality assurance can beneﬁt from a strong link to and formaliza-
tion of the accumulated corpus of geographic knowledge, that is, knowledge of how
the geographic world is constructed. The fourth section explores another persistent
theme in VGI research – debates about the nature and implications of the individual
and collective processes through which VGI is created. In the ﬁfth section, we advance
the concept of hybridity in relation to VGI and to future research and practice. Finally,

we conclude this chapter by situating VGI, GIScience, and geography in the emerg-
ing fourth paradigm – data-intensive inquiries across the disciplines.



   20.2      Space, Place, and VGI


Geographers and others have long drawn a distinction between space and place. While
the distinction has many dimensions, by limiting our discussion to the digital world,
we hope we can shed some light and more importantly address the implications for
20  Prospects for VGI Research and the Emerging Fourth Paradigm                    363


VGI research. A spatial perspective emphasizes position on the surface of the Eatrh  te,
calculation of distances and directions, and indeed all of the apparatus of geographic
information systems (GIS), based as it is on knowledge of the precise positions of

features. A key GIS function is topological overlayor the spatial join, the ability to
link together information based on common location. Thus, for example, one might
link details of a road accident at some location to the attributes of the road on which
the accident occurred, or the county containing its location, allowing various hypoth-
eses to be investigated. From this perspective, features with indeterminate boundaries,

such as “downtown Santa Barbara,” present a problem (Montello et al.      2003 ) . More
broadly, GIS technology tends to favor features with precisely deﬁned boundaries and
locations (Burrough and Frank 1996), such as the counties and census tracts of the
administrative hierarchy, or the rivers and lakes of surﬁcial hydrology.
   Things are very different in the informal world of human discourse. People tend

to refer to locations by name, whether or not such names refer to precisely bounded
areas. People tend not to know the precise latitude and longitude of features or to
care very much about precise distances and directions. Instead, references to loca-
tion occur largely through place-names, street addresses, and points of interest; and
such references frequently allow something equivalent to a spatial join, as when a

reference to Santa Barbara provides a link to other information about that place.
Goodchild and Hill (2008) describe the gazetteer, an index of ofﬁcially recognized
place-names, as providing an essential link between the informal world of human
discourse and the formal, spatial world of GIS. Nevertheless, a gazetteer provides
only a limited form of link, being traditionally composed only of a triple (name,

type, location) where location provides only a point coordinate even for a spatially
extended object.
   Because VGI is created by citizen volunteers, it tends to inherit the character of
human discourse rather than scientiﬁc measurement and thus to have strong links to

the world of place – in other words, VGI suggests a context that is more platial than
traditional GIS. Indeed, it is remarkable that place-names have played a surprisingly
minimal role in traditional GIS, being absent from the list of seven framework data
types developed by the US Federal Geographic Data Committee ( http://www.fgdc.
gov/framework ).

   In a platial world, planimetric control is far less important than in a spatial world.
Distorted maps, such as the Beck map of the London Underground and its many
emulators around the world, sacriﬁce planimetric rigor for visual clarity and proper-
ties that are more important to users of mass-transit systems: the routes serviced, the
order of stops along each route, and the interchanges between routes. Directions are

typically simpliﬁed to a discrete set (8 for the Beck map), and distances distorted by
as much as an order of magnitude. Yet such maps are clearly more useful to the
traveler. Much the same could be said of the sketch maps that are often provided to
visitors in many parts of the world: by depicting only essential detail, distorting
distances and directions, and focusing on named places and points of interest, such

maps provide a perfectly adequate service. Yet the lack of planimetric control means
that they can never be used to effect a spatial join or to provide accurate estimates
of distance or area, two of the motivations that drove the development of the earliest
GIS (Foresman    1998 ) .
364                                                                    S. Elwood et al.


   It seems to us that VGI creates an opportunity for research on a very different,
novel kind of GIS, in short a platial GIS, that would emphasize a platial rather than
a spatial perspective. The sketch map would be its primary method of display, and
functions would be needed to derive sketch maps from planimetric maps. It would

support joining based on name rather than location; other key research questions
might include:

• What is the appropriate functionality for a platial GIS? Which functions of
   spatial GIS would be relevant, and which new functions would be needed?
• What kinds of VGI could be solicited and used to populate a platial GIS?
• What research in cognitive issues would be needed to operationalize platial GIS?
• What would be the appropriate data model for a platial GIS? Would linked data

   provide an appropriate paradigm?
• How might uncertainty be characterized in a platial approach?




   20.3      Assuring VGI Quality

The topic of data quality began to attract attention in GIScience in the late 1980s

(Goodchild and Gopal 1988), building on efforts to develop quality standards for
geographic information (Guptill and Morrison      1995)and on the application of
statistical methods to error analysis in cartography (Maling 1989 ) and surveying.
Since then, a large amount of work has been published, ranging from applications
of geostatistics to the use of fuzzy sets. The growth of VGI clearly raises many

issues of data quality, given the almost complete lack of quality control or any of
the other mechanisms used to measure and assure quality in traditional geographic
information.
   There would seem to be three ways of addressing the problem of quality assur-
ance in VGI. First, it is often argued that crowdsourcing converges on the truth if

people have the opportunity to review and correct errors. Named in honor of Linus
Torvalds (Raymond 1999) and formulated as a principle of software development,
Linus’ law asserts that, “given enough eyes, all bugs are shallow”; in other words,
the probability of a bug in software being discovered rises with the number of people
who have reviewed the software. Projects such as Wikipedia rely heavily on the
principle, arguing that errors in the encyclopedia will eventually be discovered and

corrected. The principle clearly works best when the number of reviewers is large
and better therefore for errors in popular facts than for errors in obscure facts.
   Unfortunately, Linus’s law does not translate well to the geographic context.
Errors in assertions about prominent features, such as Mt. Everest, will quickly
attract attention, but errors concerning obscure features in areas of the world that are

sparsely populated will likely escape attention. Sites such as Wikimapia may even
attract malicious behaviors that exploit this principle, as when a contributor is
tempted to ﬁnd a minor feature in a remote part of the world and name it for himself
or herself.
20  Prospects for VGI Research and the Emerging Fourth Paradigm                  365


   A more robust and reliable approach relies on the development of a social
structure of review. Individuals with a track record of steady, reliable contributions
can be invited to take on the role of moderator or gatekeeper, reviewing the contri-

butions of others for quality. Moderators may specialize in certain feature types or
certain areas of the world. In effect, social structures replicate the administrative
structures of agencies, but in an entirely voluntary way. In Google’s Map Maker,
the highest levels of the hierarchy are reserved for Google employees (see Chap.
 17by Dobson and Chap. 14by Coleman in this volume), and no asserted fact is

accepted until it has been reviewed by an employee. This social approach to
quality assurance appears to work well for OpenStreetMap (Haklay         2010 ) , as it
does for Wikipedia.
   But a third approach appears to offer an even more effective way of assuring
quality in VGI. As Tobler (1970) stated in his famous ﬁrst law of geography – “All

things are related but nearby things are more related than distant things.” In short,
the geographic world is far from an independent assemblage of phenomena and,
instead, is subject to numerous relationships and constraints that determine what
can exist at some location (and at some time, if the phenomenon is dynamic). One
might term these the rules of geographic syntax, analogous to the syntactic rules

that govern any language. In the case of a wildﬁre emergency, for example, the
assertion “theﬁre is at x” might be checked against an array of rules: Has aﬁre
been reported anywhere else near x? What is the current wind direction and is      x
downwind of any location already known to be burning? Is there suitable ﬁre fuel
at x, and is it sufﬁciently dry to ignite? A myriad of such rules can be formulated

and if appropriately implemented could be used to examine a purported fact, give
it a probability of being true, and recommend appropriate action: acceptance,
rejection, query, etc. In effect, the set of such rules constitutes the corpus of knowl-
edge about the geographic world and thus the core of the discipline of geography.

Yet to date no coordinated effort has been made to assemble these rules into a
formal set that can be implemented in a computing system. Such an effort, even in
the comparatively narrow domain of wildﬁre, would be immensely valuable.
Examples of such rule bases are reported to exist in the systems developed by some
mapping companies to assess incoming volunteered corrections to their data, but

only in an ad hoc form.
   Before such an approach can be implemented, several issues will need to be
researched:

• How might such rules of geographic syntax be formally structured and imple-
   mented in a computational system?
• How might rules be organizedaccording to their degreeof abstraction andgeneral
   or speci ﬁ c nature?

• Can rules be used to assign quantitative measures of likelihood to purported
   geographic facts?
• What kinds of analysis of real-world geographies might yield suitable rules?
• How should rules be organized according to the various data types and domains
   of geographic knowledge?
366                                                                    S. Elwood et al.


   20.4      VGI: Voluntary, Participatory, Individual, Collective?


A great deal of VGI research continues to focus on the nature of the social processes
through which VGI is created, as a way of conceptualizing how it borrows on and
departs from earlier paradigms for creating geographic information, and their impli-
cations for the resulting information. Among other things, this line of work has

noted a blurring of boundaries of various roles associated with spatial data and
mapping, such as expert/professional/amateur or producer/user (Goodchild       2007 ;
Haklay et al. 2008; Budhathoki et al. 2010), and debated whether the notion of
“volunteering” is sufﬁcient to characterize the wide range of ways that VGI is
generated (Sieber 2011; Chap. 3by Harvey, this volume). The contributed chapters
continue to detail the tremendous heterogeneity in the social processes and relations

from which VGI emerges, as well as their implications for the content, quality, and
social/political signiﬁcance of the information. Across the initiatives detailed in this
collection, we ﬁnd data schemes and contribution protocols that range from highly
structured and closely monitored national and local government efforts toﬁt VGI
into existing conventional data infrastructures, to the radically open scheme of

OpenStreetMap’s user-generated wiki-ontologies (in which users are free to create
their own spatial objects, feature classiﬁcation types, and relationships among
them). These examples show VGI being generated from practices that range from
highly individualized to group-based efforts variably argued to be collective, civic,
or participatory. And it is increasingly clear that any given VGI collection is the

result of many different scopes/scales of contribution – from one-time contributions
by some to sustained high-volume contributions by others.
   With a rich body of evidence documenting these key dimensions in the heteroge-
neous social processes of VGI creation, a critical next step is deepening our under-
standing of what these factors mean for the character, content, and quality of VGI,
as well as its societal implications. What dimensions of a contributor’s experiential

knowledge can we expect to be included or excluded in a VGI initiative that is highly
structured through a preexisting data scheme versus one that emerges more organi-
cally through users’ contributions and revisions? How do different kinds of social
connectivities and interactivities in VGI initiatives shape the content and character
of the information that emerges? The cases here provide examples of VGI emerging

from social or collective encounters that include deeply individualized activities,
initiatives by groups afﬁliated only through their involvement in a common VGI
effort, initiatives in which individuals contribute information to an institutional or
governmental project without necessarily joining it, and richly collaborative endeavors
by preexisting groups already strongly connected through shared experiences,

knowledge, and collective endeavors.
   There is much yet to understand about how these differing social encounters
around VGI creation and sharing shape the information that results. For example,
the “long tail” effect in VGI (a few contributors will generate a great deal of infor-
mation, while most others offer only a few contributions) is well documented, but

as yet we know relatively little about what this means with respect to data content,
20  Prospects for VGI Research and the Emerging Fourth Paradigm                     367


quality, and reliability. In practice, the long tail effect means that any given collection
of VGI is generated by contributors with very different commitments, familiarity
with the initiative or its data schemes, or knowledge about the phenomena in

question (Goodchild2009 ) . Yet we cannot assume the most proli ﬁ c contributors are
likely to be the most accurate or reliable. It may well be the case that low-volume
contributors offer deep and direct “platial” knowledge, while high-volume contrtio  brus
are offering moreﬂeeting observations. In short, there remains much work to be
done in understanding the forms of knowledge and social connection from which

individuals and groups are generating VGI, and their implications for the data.
   Within our efforts to better understand the social processes and relationships
from which VGI emerges, the contributed chapters also point to a need to continue
reﬁning our theorizations of voluntarism, civic engagement, public participation,
and collective action in relation to VGI. Much of the early conversation about the

social signiﬁcance of VGI has debated whether it stands to enhance these endeavors
or undercut them by promoting “thin” forms of participation or individualism over
social connectivity (Corbett 2011; Poore 2011; Sieber 2011 ) . Clearly, actors who
contribute a single data object to OpenStreetMap or report observations to local
government via a VGI interface are participating or performing civic engagement of

a sort, but in a very different manner than the dominant understandings of participa-
tion or engagement that have been part of, for example, prior work on participatory
GIS or participatory planning (Sieber 2006; Dunn 2007 ) . Beyond simply critiquing
the sociopolitical processes of VGI exempliﬁed in these kinds of activities as not
sufﬁciently “participatory,” we need context-speciﬁc accounts of how, when, and

where individual and collective contributions of information may constitute partici-
pation or engagement. As well, we must consider whether the emergence and expan-
sion of VGI as a phenomenon may be contributing to a shift in societal expectations
about what it means to do these things. Sieber( 2011), for example, asks whether

VGI itself contributes to a transformation in what it means to volunteer. Finally,
Lin’s (Chap. 6, this volume) discussion of VGI activities in and about China reminds
us of the need for careful contextualization of such claims. She shows that the mean-
ings of participation and civic engagement are geographically contingent, as are the
political and technological opportunity structures that govern the forms they can

take in a particular place.
   Circulating in these debates are very different assumptions about what the
participatory, collective, or civic dimension of VGI entails and how it is constituted.
For some, making and sharing collectively authored content is itself a collective
action, one that contributes to what Hardy (Chap. 11, this volume) terms a “larger

distributed civic participation.” Along these lines, some readings of OpenStreetMap
suggest that in a context in which access to some forms of spatial data has been
deeply restricted and dominated by national mapping agencies, creating a crowd-
sourced, openly shared spatial data resource is deeply political (Haklay2010 ) . Other
accounts, such as Corbett’s (Chap. 13   , this volume) case of long-distance “map-

mediated dialogue,” frame the participatory or collective dimensions of VGI as
stemming not from simply contributing information but from involvement in delib-
erative processes that foster shared knowledge. Still others emphasize VGI as a site
368                                                                    S. Elwood et al.


of political formation, arguing that making and sharing geographic information or
representations contributes to the formation of self-aware civic or political actors, a
critical precursor to political engagement, and a factor in shaping how these actors
participate or engage (Lin, Chap.  6, this volume; Wilson 2011 ) .

   Drawing out these and other tacitassumptions about participation andthe political
context that underlie framings of VGI as participatory, collective, or civic (or not!)
is an essential step in continuing to reﬁne our theorizations of its social and political
signiﬁcance. In this effort, there is much we can draw from (and contribute to)
research on isolation and connectivities rendered through social media (Turkle

2011), debates about shifts in the nature and scale of social and political ties that are
created through new media (Shirky 2010), and resultant shifts in widely accepted
meanings of activism or engagement (Lieverouw    2011 ) . Morberoadly, someongoing
research questions may include:

• What kinds of state-civil society relationships are produced or transformed
   through the creation and use of VGI?
• What forms of deliberation, collaboration, or participation are being fostered (or
   constrained) around the creation and use of VGI, and how do these vary across

   cultural and political contexts?
• Does VGI imply transformations in the social construction and politics of “data,”
   “science,” or “geographic information”?




   20.5      Hybrid VGI Futures: From Analysis to Synthesis


Throughout this collection, a persistent theme has been the ways that VGI strad-
dles a host of boundaries. As a form of data, VGI may have a “spatial” dimension
(in the precise Cartesian sense required in many digital environments) while
simultaneously being richly platial. A particular data object or VGI artifact may

have quantitative and qualitative dimensions (a photograph tagged with latitude/
longitude coordinates) or may combine visual, textual, and numerical content.
The production and use of VGI bridges the social roles that were part of preceding
paradigms of geographic information creation and use: producer/user, expert/
amateur/professional, citizen scientist, and “local” knowledge. Given the com-
plex assemblages of hardware, software, organizations and institutions, and indi-

vidual actors often involved in producing it, VGI cannot be situated squarely
within the public, private, or nonproﬁt sectors. In terms of its use and applications,
we see copresent trends toward integrating VGI into existing conventional spatial
data initiatives (such as the work of national mapping agencies or census bureaus)
and toward fostering entirely new modes of data creation and governance. With an

eye toward all of these blendings and blurrings, Sui and DeLyser (2012 ) frame VGI
as a hybrid, drawing on the notion of hybridity as referring “…to those things and
processes that transgress and displace such boundaries and in so doing produce
something that is ontologically new” (Rose 2000, p. 364). Here, we argue that a
similar hybridity will be required in our   engagements with V GI going forward,
20  Prospects for VGI Research and the Emerging Fourth Paradigm                   369


whether in terms of data handling, analytical       tools, or epistemo logical and
methodological frameworks.
   Some of this needed hybridity is already in evidence in existing VGI practice,

especially with respect to questions of data compilation, integration, quality, and
sharing. In this volume, Dobson, Johnson and Sieber, Coleman, and Poore and Wolf
all point to the emergence and continued need for blended metadata forms and data
quality measures that integrate conventional approaches (often drawn from existing
SDI models) with new forms speciﬁcally oriented toward VGI. While their examples

focus especially on public- and private-sector spatial data initiatives, we can also see
NGOs as needing and seeking such resources that support blendings of conven-
tional spatial data and VGI, given the demonstrated tendency of these groups to
ﬂexibly mix a range of data and technology resources (Sieber    2000; Elwood 2006 ) .
User reviews of data quality, reliability ratings of contributors, and other social

approaches to quality assurance are already in play in VGI services or initiatives
such as Ushahidi or FracTracker. But as Poore and Wolf (Chap.        4, this volume),
Dobson (Chap. 17   , this volume), and Grira et al.(   2010 ) suggest, an especially
important next step lies in developing augmented forms of metadata appropriate for
working with VGI or blended authoritative/VGI data sets, perhaps integrating struc-

tures and practices from conventional SDIs with those drawn from open-source
mapping and other kinds of Web 2.0 initiatives. These efforts are necessary and
important, but they will also be resource intensive. Some local and national govern-
ment VGI initiatives are initially justifying their turn toward citizen-contributed
information in terms of anticipated cost reductions (Esri      2010 ) , but the initial

research contributed here suggests that any realistic efforts to integrate VGI with
existing conventionally curated data will require a host of new structures, techniques,
and resources, augmenting rather than replacing existing tools and practices.
   In working with VGI as a source of evidence in research, its spatial/platial hybrid-

ity introduces some challenges. Using VGI as a source of evidence almost inevitably
requires methodologies prepared to handle both the precise locational information of
a massive collection of VGI, as well as the context- and detail-rich knowledge that
may also emerge from it. Of course no single methodological approach will sufﬁce,
given the diversity of VGI as a phenomenon and the range of questions researchers

will inevitably use it to pursue. But it may be possible to identify different method-
ological trajectories best suited to particular kinds of VGI or research questions. For
extremely large collections of textual VGI, quantitative techniques that discern
semantic similarities or shifts in meaning have potential. And McKenzie’s (Chap1   .2,
this volume) natural language processing techniques, for example, work toward

being able to understand the content and ﬂuidity of individuals’ experiential knowl-
edge, but do so via quantitative approaches to linguistic data that can be deployed on
a scale previously impossible. Yet for smaller collections of VGI that span multiple
representational forms (such as text, images, and maps), interpretive methods such as
those emerging from qualitative GIS may be helpful. Such approaches include

grounded visualization, computer-aided qualitative GIS, and geonarrative supported
interpretive analysis of digital objects that have both quantitative and qualitative
dimensions; mix visual, textual, and numerical representations; and span the
“spatial/platial” divide (Knigge and Cope  2009; Jung and Elwood2010 ) .
370                                                                      S. Elwood et al.


   Our notion of a platial GIS introduced in Sect. 20.2ﬂags the probable need for
technologies that can handle Cartesian and non-Cartesian spatial relations or topol-

ogies together, or blend conventional modes of geovisual representation and spatial
analysis with multimedia representation and modes of analysis. In spite of the many
advances in mixed-method GIS, neither existing spatial technologies nor existing
qualitative analysis software is fully prepared to do this, nor deal with dynamic

content mediated over the Internet. Imagine, for example, a digital analysis and
representation software that could support the kind of actor-network analysis that
Palmer (Chap.   16, this volume) carries out in his analysis of severe-storm reports on
Twitter and conventional spatial analysis of patterns in the contributed observations.

In envisioning and beginning to implement such hybrid technologies for working
with VGI, the recent push for spatial analysis and geovisual representation capab   tiielis
in computer-aided qualitative data analysis software may offer some fruitful possi-
bilities (Fielding and Cisneros-Puebla2009), as could the emergence of Web-based
                                                                       1
software oriented toward mixed-method analysis, such as Dedoose.
   As we try to build the analytical, methodological, and epistemological hybrids
needed for ongoing research with and about VGI, there is much to be drawn from
geography’s long-standing tradition of mixed- and multi-method research (Elwood

2009; Sui and DeLyser 2012). Integrative frameworks such as critical quantitative
methods (Sheppard 2001; Kwan and Schwannen 2009 ) , qualitative and feminist
GIS (Kwan 2002; Kwan and Knigge 2006; Cope and Elwood 2009 ) , and, more
recently, geohumanities or spatial humanities (Warf and Arias 2009 ; Bodenhamer
et al. 2011; Dear et al. 2011)have paved paths to guide future VGI research and

practices. In particular, geohumanities’ approaches to integrating spatial-analytic
and interpretive modes of analysis and working across visual, textual, numerical,
archival, and ethnographic forms of evidence have much to offer. As well, given the
position of VGI at the conﬂuence of a number of constructed binaries – research/

practice, scholarly/activist, science/society, and more – there is also much to be
learned from other arenas in which geographers have grappled with them, including
participatory action research or “public geographies” (Kindon et al.      2008 ; Fuller
2008; Ward 2007). At the broadest level, these approaches share an enacted com-

mitment to working across multiple (and often very different) epistemologies, data
types, modes of representation and analysis, and institutions. This is precisely what
will be required of our work with and about VGI going forward, with some of the
following questions potentially guiding these efforts:

• What advances in mixed-method epistemology and practice are needed to

   support researchers’ efforts to work with VGI?
• How might hybrid methodological frameworks for working with VGI suggest
   productive avenues for “scaling up” qualitative methods or enriching efforts to
   discern meaning via quantitative techniques?
• What digital divides are produced or dismantled through VGI and blended VGI/

   authoritative data sets?


 We are grateful to Jin-Kyu Jung for bringing this example to our attention.
20  Prospects for VGI Research and the Emerging Fourth Paradigm                 371


   20.6      VGI, GIScience, and Geography: Toward

        the Fourth Paradigm?

We began this book by situating the VGI phenomenon in the emerging world of big

data and the growing global digital divide. Throughout this book, contributors from
multiple disciplines and backgrounds have covered a wide range of conceptual,
computational, and social/political issues related to VGI and its applications. We
would like to end by discussing the implications of VGI research for GIScience and
geography in the context of the fourth paradigm – data-intensive inquiries across

the sciences (both physical and social/behavioral) and the arts/humanities as a
concomitant growth of big data (Hey et al.   2009; Bartscherer and Coover 2011 ;
The U.S. National Science Foundation 2011; Berry 2012 ) .
   The fourth paradigm, also known as eScience in the literature, was advocated by
Jim Gray (2007 ) . According to Gra  2y00( ) , scienti ﬁ c discoveries until recently (the

early days of the twenty-ﬁrst century) were made according to three dominant
paradigms – the empirical (by describing natural phenomena), the theoretical (by
using and testing models and general laws), and the computational (by simulating
complex phenomena usingﬁ   ctional/ariial or small real-world data sets)
approaches. The new world of big data demands that researchers think beyond the

three traditional methodological boxes. Gray (007) argues that a new eScience aim-
ing at seamlessly linking information technology with traditional domain inquiries
can potentially serve as the new ark upon which we can survive the current big-data
deluge. Unlike all the previous paradigms that deal with either artiﬁcial or relatively
small data sets, the deﬁning feature of the fourth paradigm eScience is data intensive,

often dealing with data in peta- or even exabytes. Also quite distinct from the discov-
ery processes in previous paradigms, data, methods, machines, and people are
increasingly linked and networked in data-intensive inquiries (Nielsen2012 ) .
   Evidently, VGI, or more generally geocoded data, is quickly becoming an impor-
tant part of big data (Manyika et al. 2011). By all indications, GIScience, and to a

limited extent geography, is moving rapidly to embrace the fourth paradigm – data-
intensive inquiry. In fact, both geography and GIScience have deeper roots in data-
intensive inquiries. Back in the early 1980s, geographer Peter Gould (981 ) shouted
that we should “let data speak for themselves” (p. 166), though with a limited fol-

lowing. Also despite its ups and downs, the International Symposium on Spatial
Data Handling is still very much alive after almost 30 years since its commencement
back in 1984 (www.sdh12.org). It is also interesting and gratifying for us to compare
the content of Gray’s (2007) vision of the fourth paradigm of eScience with that of
GIScience laid out by one of us some 20 years ago (Goodchild 1992 ) . With all the

progress and advances that have been made during the past 20 years (Goodchild
2010), we strongly believe that GIScience and geography are poised for new break-
throughs if we can ﬁnd creative ways to surf big data and the fourth-paradigm wave
with VGI as our surfboard. Preliminary results following the data-intensive para-
digm are exciting and promising, as demonstrated by the papers in a recent collection

on data-intensive geospatial computing in the International Journal of Geographic
Information Science     (Ji2g011, Vol. 25, No. 8). Furthermore, the emerging fourth
372                                                                    S. Elwood et al.


paradigm in GIScience and geography will continue to push for more open access to
both data and source code in GIScience/geographic research (Jiang 2011 ) – a prac-
tice long overdue within the geospatial community. We would like to encourage

readers to think big in the age of big data. Here is a list of big questions for GIScientists
and geographers (both paleo- and neogeographers); we invite you the reader to come
up with your own questions (and answers) in the days ahead:

• Theoretical questions: What’s the role of theories in the age of big data? What
   are the pros and cons of knowledge production through mining the big data?
   Do data have the same level of unreasonable effectiveness as mathematics
   (Wigner 1960) that will lead to new discoveries (Halevy et al. 2009 ) ? Or has the

   current torrent of big data carried us to a new terra incognita? Is the rapidly
   expanding digital universe, similar to the physical one, ultimately too big to
   know (Weinberger 2012 ) ?
• Methodological questions: Will synthesis be driving methodology in the age of
   big data? If so, how can it be done? Should we follow the model of big science

   to develop something along the lines of the Living Earth Simulator (http://www.
   futurict.ethz.ch/FuturICT), or, at a much smaller scale, a digital version of the
   microscope for science (Higginbotham 2011), or a plug-and-play macroscope
   envisioned by Börner (2011 ) ?
• Technical questions: What kind of new cyber infrastructure is needed to deal the

   ever-expanding digital universe? Is there an ultimate physical limit of storing all
   the data humans create? Is cyber spatial infrastructure (Wright and Wang 2011 )
   still needed or is it going to be submerged with the new cyber infrastructure
   increasingly dominated by cloud and mist computing?

• Social/political/ethical/legal issues: Are technologies related to big data truly
   liberating as articulated by Ghonim (2012) – “the power of people is bigger than
   the people in power”? What are the consequences and implications when big data
   is increasingly in the hands of big corporations such as Google and Facebook?
   What are the long-term implications of big data for privacy and personal liberty?

   In 1900, German mathematician David Hilbert(         1900)outlined a list of 23
fundamental problems in mathematics, which inspired new generations of mathe-

maticians for making many exciting breakthroughs in the twentieth century. Three
former AAG presidents (Cutter et al.2002) have attempted a list of ten big questions
in geography. We believe it is imperative, perhaps more urgent than ever, that we
continue to ask even bigger questions in the age of big data. What are your big
questions? Crowdsourcing them will shed a brighter light on the relevance of the

questions themselves and perhaps even the answers.



    References

Bartscherer, T., & Coover, R. (Eds.). (2011).Switching codes: Thinking through digital technology
   in the humanities and the arts. Chicago: University of Chicago.
Berry, D. M. (Ed.). (2012). Understanding digital humanities. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
  20   Prospects for VGI Research and the Emerging Fourth Paradigm                             373


 Bodenhamer, D., Corrigan, J., & Harris, T. (Eds.). (2011).   The spatial humanities: GIS and the

      future of humanities scholarship. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
  Börner, K. (2011). Plug-and-play macroscopes. Communications of the ACM, 54 (3), 60–69.
 Budhathoki, N., Nedovic-Budic, Z., & Bruce, B. (2010). An interdisciplinary frame for under-
      standing volunteered geographic information. Geomatica, 64 (1), 11–26.

  Burrough, P. A., & Frank, A. U. (Eds.). (1996). eographic objects with indeterminate boundaries.
      Bristol: Taylor and Francis.
  Cope, M., & Elwood, S. (2009). Qualitative GIS: A mixed methods approach. London: Sage.
  Corbett, J. (2011, April 13).The revolution will not begeotagged:Exploring the role of the partici-

      patory Geoweb in advocacy and supporting social change. Paper presented at annual meeting
      of the Association of American Geographers, Seattle, WA.
 Cutter, S., Golledge, R., & Graf, W. (2002). The big questions in geography.     The Professional
      Geographer, 54 , 305–317.

  Dear, M., Ketchum, J., Luria, S., & Richardson, D. (2011). GeoHumanities: Art, history, and text
      at the edge of place. London/New York: Routledge.
Dunn, C. (2007). Participatory GIS: A people’s GIS?        Progress in Human Geography, 31 (5),
      617–638.

  Elwood, S. (2006). Beyond cooptation or resistance: Urban spatial politics, community organiza-
      tions, and GIS-based spatial narratives. Annals of the Association of American Geographers,
      96 (2), 323–341.
  Elwood, S. (2009). Mixed methods: Thinking, doing, and asking in multiple ways. In D. DeLyser,

      M. Crang, L. McDowell, S. Aitken, & S. Herbert (Eds.)T , he handbook of qualitative geography
      (pp. 94–113). London: Sage.
    ESRI. (2010)T .he latest in citizen engagement . ESRI advertising supplement.    http://media2.
      govtech.com/documents/PCIO10_ESRI_V.pdf       . Accessed 16 May 2011.

  Fielding, N., & Cisneros-Puebla, C. (2009). CAQDAS-GIS convergence: Toward a new integrated
      mixed method research practice? Journal of Mixed Methods Research, 3 (4), 349–370.
  Foresman, T. W. (Ed.). (1998). The history of geographic information systems: Perspectives from
      the pioneers. Upper Saddle River: Prentice Hall.

 Fuller, D. (2008). Public geographies I – Taking stock.   Progress in Human Geography, 32 (6),
      834–844.
    Ghonim, W. (2012   R)e.volution 2.0: The power of the people is greater than the people in power .
      New York: Houghton Mifﬂin Harcourt.

   Goodchild, M. F. (1992). Geographical information scienceI.nternational Journal of Geographical
      Information Systems, 6 (1), 31–45.
 Goodchild, M. (2007). Citizens as sensors: The world of volunteered geography.       GeoJournal,
      69 (4), 211–221.

  Goodchild, M. (2009). Neogeography and the nature of geographic expertise.Journal of Location
      Based Services, 3 (2), 82–96.
Goodchild, M. F. (2010). Twenty years of progress: GIScience in 2010.           Journal of Spatial
      Information Science, 1 (1), 3–20.

 Goodchild, M. F., & Gopal, S. (Eds.). (1988). Accuracy of spatial databases. New York: Taylor
      and Francis.
 Goodchild, M. F., & Hill, L. L. (2008). Introduction to digital gazetteer research.  International
      Journal of Geographical Information Science, 22 (10), 1039–1044.

 Gould, P. (1981). Letting data speaking for themselves.   Annals of the Association of American
      Geographers, 71 (2), 166–176.
  Gray, J. (2007). eScience – A transformed scientiﬁc method. Presentation made to the NRC-CSTB.
      http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/um/people/gray/talks/NRC-CSTB_eScience.ppt               .

      Accessed 19 Dec 2011.
  Grira, J., Bedard, Y., & Roche, S. (2010). Spatial data uncertainty in the VGI world: Going from
      consumer to producer. Geomatica, 64 (1), 61–71.
  Guptill, S. C., & Morrison, J. L. (Eds.). (1995).Elements of spatial data quality. Oxford: Elsevier.
  Haklay, M. (2010). How good is volunteered geographical information? A comparative study of

      OpenStreetMap and ordnance survey datasets. Environment and Planning B, 37 (4), 682–703.
   374                                                                              S. Elwood et al.


  Haklay, M., Singleton, A., & Parker, C. (2008). Web mapping 2.0: The neogeography of the

       GeoWeb. Geography Compass, 2 (6), 2011–2039.
  Halevy, A., Norvig, P., & Pereira, P. (2009). The unreasonable effectiveness of data.       IEEE
       Intelligent Systems, March/April, 8–12.
  Hey, T., Tansley, S., & Tolle, K. (Eds.). (2009).  The fourth paradigm: Data-intensive scientiﬁc

       discovery. Redmond: Microsoft Research.
 Higginbotham, S. (2011). Big data: Science’s microscope of the 21st century.           http://www.
       businessweek.com/technology/big-data-sciences-microscope-of-the-21st-century-11092011.
       html. Accessed 19 Dec 2011.

  Hilbert, D. (1900). Mathematical problems.     Göttinger Nachrichten, 253–297 (original work in
       German; translated into English in 1902).
Jiang, B. (2011). Making GIScience research more open access.             International Journal of
       Geographical Information Science, 25 (8), 1217–1220.

  Jung, J., & Elwood, S. (2010). Extending the qualitative capabilities of GIS: Computer-aided
       qualitative GIS. Transactions in GIS, 14 (1), 63–87.
   Kindon, S., Pain, R., & Kesby, M. (2008).Participatory action research approaches and methods:
       Connecting people, participation and place. London: Routledge.

  Knigge, L., & Cope, M. (2009). Grounded visualization and scale: A recursive examination of
       community spaces. In M. Cope & S. Elwood (Eds.),         Qualitative GIS: A mixed methods
       approach (pp. 95–114). London: Sage.
   Kwan, M. (2002). Feminist visualization: Re-envisioning GIS as a method in feminist geography

       research. Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 92 (4), 645–661.
   Kwan, M., & Knigge, L. (2006). Doing qualitative research with GIS: An oxymoronic endeavor?
       Environment and Planning A, 38 (11), 1999–2002.
   Kwan, M., & Schwannen, T. (2009). Critical quantitative geographies.Environment and Planning

       A, 41 (2), 261–264.
     Lieverouw, L. (2011 A)l.ternative and activist new media. Cambridge, MA: Polity Press.
     Maling, D. H. (198M  9)e.asurements from maps: Principles and methods of cartometry . Oxford:
       Pergamon.

   Manyika, J., Chui, M., Brown, B., Bughin, J., Dobbs, R., Roxburgh, C., & Byers, A. H. (2011). Big
       data: The next frontier for innovation, competition, and productivity.  http://www.mckinsey.
       com/Insights/MGI/Research/Technology_and_Innovation/Big_data_The_next_frontier_for_
       innovation. Accessed 19 Dec 2011.

    Montello, D. R., Goodchild, M. F., Gottsegen, J., & Fohl, P. (2003). Where’s downtown? Behavioral
       methods for determining referents of vague spatial querie. patial Cognition and Computation,
       3 (2–3), 185–204.
     Nielsen, M. (201R 2)e.inventing discovery: The new era of networked Scienc. Princeton: Princeton

       University Press.
   Poore, B. (2011, April 13). VGI/PGI: Virtual community or bowling alone? Paper presented at
       annual meeting of the Association of American Geographers, Seattle, WA.
     Raymond, E. S. (199T9h).e cathedral and the bazaar. Sebastopol: O’Reilly.

    Rose, G. (2000). Hybridity. In R. J. Johnston, D. Gregory, G. Pratt, & M. Watts (Es),e dictionary
       of human geography (pp. 364–365). Oxford: Blackwell.
Sheppard, E. (2001). Quantitative geography: Representations, practices, and possibilities.
       Environment and Planning D: Society & Space, 19 (5), 535–554.

     Shirky, C. (2010 C).gnitive surplus: How technology makes consumers into collaborators . New
       York: Penguin.
   Sieber, R. (2000). GIS implementation in the grassroots. URISA Journal, 12 (1), 15–51.
  Sieber, R. (2006). Public participation geographic information systems: A literature review and

       framework. Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 96 (3), 491–507.
   Sieber, R. (2011, April 13). Volunteered geographic information: Motivation or empowerment?
       Paper presented at annual meeting of the Association of American Geographers, Seattle, WA.
  20  Prospects for VGI Research and the Emerging Fourth Paradigm                            375


  Sui, D., & DeLyser, D. (2012). Crossing the qualitative-quantitative chasm I: Hybrid geographies,

     the spatial turn, and volunteered geographic information (VGI).Progress in Human Geography,
     36 (1), 111–124.
 The U.S. National Science Foundation. (2011). Rebuilding the mosaic: Fostering research in the
     social, behavioral, and economic sciences at the National Science Foundation in the next

     decade.  www.nsf.gov/pubs/2011/nsf11086/nsf11086.pdf. Accessed 19 Dec 2011.
  Tobler, W. R. (1970). A computer movie simulating urban growth in the Detroit region.Economic
     Geography, 46 (2), 234–240.
    Tuan, Y.-F. (1977S)p.ace and place: The perspective of experience . Minneapolis: University of

     Minnesota Press.
    Turkle, S. (201A)l.one together: Why we expect more from technology and less from each other .
     New York: Basic Books.
Ward, K. (2007). Geography and public policy: Activist, participatory and policy geographies.

     Progress in Human Geography, 31 (5), 695–705.
  Warf, B., & Arias, S. (Eds.). (2009).The spatial turn: Interdisciplinary perspectives. London/New
     York: Routledge.
    Weinberger, D. (201T2o). big to know: Rethinking knowledge now that the facts aren’t the facts,

     experts are everywhere, and the smartest person in the room is the .New York: Basic Books.
Wigner, E. P. (1960). The unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics in the natural sciences.
     Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics, 13 , 1–14.
 Wilson, M. (2011). ‘Training the eye’: Formation of the geocoding subject.    Social & Cultural

     Geography, 12 (4), 357–376.
 Wright, D. J., & Wang, S. (2011). The emergence of spatial cyber infrastructure. Proceedings of
     the National Academy of Sciences, 108 (14), 5488–5491.
         Biographies of the Editors and Contributors
















  Editors

Daniel Sui is professor of geography and distinguished professor of social and

behavioral sciences at the Ohio State University. He also serves as chair of geography
(since July 2011) and director of the Center for Urban and Regional Analysis
(CURA) (since July 2009). Sui holds adjunct professorship at the John Glenn School
of Public Affairs, Knowlton School of Architecture (the City and Regional Planning
program), and College of Public Health at OSU. Prior to assuming his position at

OSU in July 2009, Sui was professor of geography (1993–2009) and holder of the
Reta A. Haynes Endowed Chair (2001–2009) at Texas A&M University. He holds a
BS (1986) and MS (1989) from Peking University and PhD from University of
Georgia (1993). His current research interests include geographic informationsccie,
urban geography, and geographic thought. Sui has authored/coauthored 4 books and
over 100 articles in these areas. Sui was a 2009 Guggenheim Fellow. He is also a

current member of the US National Mapping Science Committee and serves as editor
in chief for GeoJournal .

Sarah Elwood is professor of geography at the University of Washington. She
received a BA in Geography from Macalester College in 1994 and an MA and PhD
in Geography from the University of Minnesota in 1996 and 2000. Her recent
research bridges critical GIS, urban political geography, qualitative methods, and
participatory action research, including a long-term collaborative project on the use

and impacts of geographic information systems and GIS-based spatial knowledge in
neighborhood revitalization, and a coedited volume on qualitative GIS. She is cur-
rently concluding a 3-year project on interactive mapping technologies in collaborative
learning and civic engagement with young teens, and beginning research on the
spatial politics of poverty and class identities in economic crisis and recovery.

Michael F. Goodchild is Jack and Laura Dangermond professor of geography at
the University of California, Santa Barbara, and director of UCSB’s Center for

Spatial Studies. He received his BA degree in Physics from Cambridge University

D. Sui et al. (eds.), Crowdsourcing Geographic Knowledge: Volunteered Geographic77
Information (VGI) in Theory and Practice, DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-4587-2
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
378                                           Biographies of the Editors and Contributors


in 1965 and his PhD in Geography from McMaster University in 1969 and has
received four honorary doctorates. He was elected to be a member of the National
Academy of Sciences and Foreign Member of the Royal Society of Canada (2002),
member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences (2006), and Foreign

Member of the Royal Society and Corresponding Fellow of the British Academy
(2010), and in 2007, he received the Prix Vautrin Lud. He serves on the editorial
boards of ten journals and book series and has published more than 15 books and
400 articles. His current research interestscenter on geographicinformation science,
spatial analysis, and uncertainty in geographic data.



Contributors (By Alphabetical Order of Last Names)


Benjamin Adams is a PhD candidate in the Department of Computer Science at the

University of California, Santa Barbara, and a member of the Spatial Cognitive
Engineering (SpaCE) Lab. His research is concerned with developing new compu-
tational methods to organize and represent geographic knowledge drawn from het-
erogeneous data sources in order to aid both humanistic and scientiﬁc inquiry. This
research touches on both the practical developmenotf tools and methodsfor exploring

and synthesizing these data as well as theoretical issues regarding the representation
of geospatial data semantics. Benjamin is the program manager for the Cognitive
Science program at the University of California, Santa Barbara. He received his MA
in Computer Science from the University of California, Santa Barbara (2011), and
BA (summa cum laude) in Social Science and Computer Science from Eastern

Michigan University (2006). He was an NSF Integrative Graduate Education and
Research Trainee in Interactive Digital Multimedia from 2007 to 2009.

Thomas Bartoschek is a doctoral student at Institute for Geoinformatics, University
of Münster, Germany, where he leads the GI@School initiative (http://www.gi-at-
school.de) in its 6th year. In his PhD studies, he is doing research on geospatial
learning and thinking with geotechnologies and on GIScience education. Volunteered
geographic information plays a key role in his scientiﬁc and professional work.
Several prototypes of applications for geospatial learning, which he has developed

or supervised, were based on VGI or made for the production of VGI in educational
contexts. In teaching, especially in his K-12 education efforts and teacher trainings,
he “evangelizes” the use and collection ofVGI and has reachedthousands ofstudents
and teachers over the last years. Thomas is also involved in the organization of the
Vespucci Summer Institute on GeographicInformation Science (http://vespucci.org).

T. Edwin Chow is an assistant professor in the Department of Geography at Texas
State University–San Marcos. He holds a PhD in Geography from the University of

South Carolina. His research interests focus in Internet GIS, volunteered geographic
information (VGI), and GIS-based modeling. His recent passion in research related
to spatial demography is to investigate the potential of Web demographics to unearth
spatial patterns of population dynamics. His other work involves a broad spectrum
of GIS-based modeling, including site assessment, quality of life, risk assessment,
Biographies of the Editors and Contributors                                       379


hydrology, and wildland ﬁre. He has been working on several collaborative research
projects to model raccoon habitats and conduct ecological risk assessment, associate
precipitation and surface runoff with ENSO periods, and simulate wildﬁre behavior

in grassland ecosystems. Edwin teaches GIS at alllevels (i.e.,undergraduate,masters,
and doctoral) as well as a graduate course in quantitative methods. He has the plea-
sure to mentor, and learn a lot more from, several masters and PhD students. He has
also been serving as an ad hoc reviewer for many GIScience journals (e.g., IJGIS)
and the NSF grant proposals.

David J. Coleman is dean of engineering and professor of geomatics engineering
at the University of New Brunswick in Canada. Prior to obtaining his PhD, he spent

15 years in the Canadian geomatics industry – ﬁrst as a project engineer, then as an
executive with one of Canada’s largest digital aerial mapping companies, and later
as an owner and partner in a GIS and land information management consulting ﬁrm.
The former chair of UNB’s Department of Geodesy and Geomatics Engineering,
Dr. Coleman has authored over 150 publications and reports dealing with land infor-

mation policy development, geomatics operations management, geographic infor-
mation standards, and spatial data infrastructure. He is a fellow of the Canadian
Academy of Engineering, a past member of the GEOIDE Research Network Board
of Directors, a former president of thCanadian Institute of Geomatics,and president-
elect of the Global Spatial Data Infrastructure Association.

Jon Corbett is an assistant professor in the Community, Culture and Global Studies
Department at UBC Okanagan and the codirector of the Centre for Social, Spatial

and Economic Justice. He has three primary research interests:ﬁrstly, to explore
how digital multimedia technologies can be combined with maps and used by people
to document, store, and communicate their spatial knowledge; secondly, to examine
how geographic representation of this knowledge using these technologies can

strengthen community internally as well as externally by increasing people’s
inﬂuence over decision-making processes; and, thirdly, to address the process and
implementation of sustainable development,particularly with respectto community-
based resource management. All aspects of his research incorporate a core commu-
nity element. Within the context of his research program, this means that the research

is of tangible beneﬁt for the communities with which he works, that those commu-
nities feel a strong sense of ownership over the research process, and that commu-
nity members are engaged by and engage in the research endeavor.

Nicolás di Tada spends most of his time designing and managing software projects.
Before starting his company, Manas Technology Solutions, Nicolás spent 10 years
as a software architect and project leader for many organizations, including start-
ups and large corporations, acquiring a background in information retrieval, machine

learning, information visualization, and Web development. During the last 7 years,
he founded two other companies in the ﬁelds of e-learning and consumer-end social
applications and guided several developmentteams through a wide v   ariety ofprojects
ranging from digital photogrammetry and biomedical signal processing to enter-
prise applications. Both for small start-ups and Fortune 500 companies, his teams

have always proudly delivered usable and effective software on time. Passionate
about the convergence between technology, science, and art to make a better world,
380                                           Biographies of the Editors and Contributors


Nicolas currently leads the design and development of InSTEDD’s software
platform, coordinating the distributed development team, open-source contributors,
interns, and volunteers.

Michael W. Dobson is president and principal consultant for TeleMapics LLC. He
provides strategic and technical consulting to national and international clients

involved in mapping, local search, location-based services, navigation, and telemat-
ics. His blog “Exploring Local” is widely read by members of the community inter-
ested in maps and mapping. He was previously employed as the CTO and executive
vice president of technology for go2 Systems where he served as the corporate
ofﬁcer responsible for technology, software engineering, IT, and product develop-

ment. go2 supplied location services, including mapping and routing to major wire-
less carriers and services, such as MSN Wireless, AT&T Wireless, Sprint, Nextel,
Verizon Wireless, and others. Earlier, Dobson was the chief technologist and chief
cartographer for Rand McNally, where he managed the technology and software
development organizations supporting the company’s map-based commercial and

consumer products and services. He also served as the company’s vice president of
business development and public relations spokesperson. Dobson began his profes-
sional career with the Geography Department at the State University of New York
at Albany where he was an assistant and then associate professor.

Rob Feick is an associate professor in the School of Planning at the University of
Waterloo. His research focuses broadly on the application of spatial information

technology to assist decision making and public participation in land management
and planning. His current research focuses on the development and evaluation of
PPGIS, VGI, and Web 2.0 tools that facilitate citizen involvement in community
planning contexts, spatial-decision-aiding methods such as GIS-based multicriteria
analysis, and Web-based spatial data visualization.

Marcus Goetzis a research assistant at the GIScience group (Geoinformatics) at
Heidelberg University since early 2010. He has a background in mathematics and

computer science and holds a diploma degree in Computer Science from the
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT). He is currently working towards his PhD
at the University of Heidelberg. Among other things, his current research interests
include 3D city models, CityGML, (3D) VGI, and OSM, as well as (3D) indoor

routing and indoor LBS.
Christopher Goranson is the director of the Parsons Institute for Information

Mapping at The New School. PIIM is a research, development, and professional
services facility that specializes in data and knowledge visualization. Previous to
working at PIIM, Chris was the director of the GIS Center within the Bureau of
Epidemiology Services, NYC DOHMH. The GIS Center is tasked with providing
centralized resources including training, consulting, map production, and geo-

graphic information analysis support to the department. Prior to joining the depart-
ment in 2004, Chris worked for a professional servicesﬁrm supporting various
federal client GIS projects including those for the EPA, FHWA, GSA, and USGS.
Biographies of the Editors and Contributors                                      381


Muki Haklay is professor of geographic information science in the Department of
Civil, Environmental and Geomatic Engineering, University College London. He is
the director of the UCL Extreme Citizen Science research group, which aims to

allow any community, regardless of their literacy, to use scientiﬁc methods and tools
to collect, analyze, interpret, and use information about their area and activities. His
research interests include (1) public access and use of environmental information,
(2) human-computer interaction (HCI) and usabilityengineering aspects of GIS, and
(3) societal aspects of GIS use – in particular, participatory mapping and citizen

science. He received his PhD in Geography from UCL and holds a BS in Computer
Science and Geography and MA in Geography from the Hebrew University of
Jerusalem.

Darren Hardy is a senior analyst for the Ocean Health Index project at the National
Center for Ecological Analysis and Synthesis, UC Santa Barbara. His research
interests include spatial analysis, open scientiﬁc computing, distributed systems,
and technology and society. He earned his PhD (2010) and Masters (2005) in

Environmental Science & Management at the Bren School, UC Santa Barbara. His
interdisciplinary dissertation examines the production and use of volunteered geo-
graphic information in Wikipedia. He has over 20 years of professional experience
in roles for academia and industry, including the Harvest information discovery and
access system (1995), an early Web search engine and proxy software (now Squid),

and software engineering positions in Silicon Valley at Netscape Communications
Corp., Afﬁnia, Inc., and Napster, Inc. He also earned MS (1993) and BS (1991)
degrees in Computer Science from the University of Colorado, Boulder.

Francis Harvey is an associate professor at the University of Minnesota. His
research interests include location privacy, spatial data infrastructures, geographic
information and sharing, semantic interoperability, and critical GIS. He serves on
the editorial boards of the  International Journal for Geographical Information

System ,Cartographica ,GeoJournal, and the journal of the URISA. He published
A GIS Primerwith Guildford Press in 2008. He is currentlyﬁnishing work on a
long-term research project in Poland considering discrepancies between the cadastre
and land use. He continues to work on SDI research, currently through an FGDC-
supported project examining the return on investment for parcel data in regional

data sharing (MetroGIS). He also contributed to the development of a model cur-
riculum and resources for GIS ethics teaching (gisprofessionalethics.org).

Bin Jiang is professor in geoinformatics and computational geography at University
of Gävle, Sweden. He is also afﬁliated to Royal Institute of Technology (KTH) at
Stockholm via KTH Research School. He worked in the past with the Hong Kong
Polytechnic University and the Centre for Advanced Spatial Analysis at University
College London. He is the founder and chair of the International Cartographic

Association Commission on Geospatial Analysis and Modeling. He has been coor-
dinating the NordForsk-funded Nordic Network in Geographic Information Science.
His research interest is geospatial analysis and modeling, in particular topological
analysis of urban street networks in the context of geographic information systems.
382                                           Biographies of the Editors and Contributors


He is currently an associate editor of the international journal         Computers,
Environment and Urban Systems .

Peter A. Johnson is a postdoctoral researcher and lecturer in the Department of
Geography at McGill University, Montreal, Canada. In 2010, he completed his PhD
in Geography, also from McGill University. For his dissertation, he developed an

agent-based model to support the development of tourism planning scenarios. His
research interests include the Geoweb, participatory GIS, and the use of geospatial
technology in a community development context. In 2012, he will begin an appoint-
ment as assistant professor in the Department of Geography and Environmental
Management at the University of Waterloo in Waterloo, Ontario.

Carsten Keßler (http://carsten.io) is a postdoc researcher at Institute for
Geoinformatics, University of Münster, Germany, where he has been working in the

Semantic Interoperability Lab (MUSIL) for several years. He has done research on
context-aware information retrieval on the Semantic Web during his PhD studies.
Volunteered geographic information has been one of his focus topics in teaching
and research over the last years, with a strong focus on the semantics of VGI. His
recent work focuses on the development of provenance-based measures of trustwor-

thiness for VGI. His other research interests are in the areas of geosemantics, linked
data and semantic technologies, context modelinga,nd collaborativeand participatory
geographic information systems. Carsten has co-organized a number of workshops
and conferences, and he currently coordinates the University of Münster’s Linked
Open Data initiative (http://lodum.de).

Scott Kraushaar graduated from the University of Missouri–Columbia with an

MA in 2011. Scott’s thesis research focuses on volunteered geographic information
and storm chasing including motivations for reporting, observing, and documenting
storm reports. Scott has an interest in meteorology and recreational storm chasing
and has been observing/spotting storms since the late 1990s. He is currently
employed with the United States Department of Defense. In his spare time, Scott

has been known to travel great distances in pursuit of rotating supercell thunder-
storms and tornadoes.

Wen Lin has been a lecturer at the School of Geography, Politics and Sociology at
Newcastle University in Newcastle upon Tyne, UK, since spring 2012. Prior to
taking her current position, Wen was an assistant professor in the Department of
Geography and Earth Science at University of Wisconsin–La Crosse (2009–2012).
Her research interests include critical GIS, public participation GIS, and urban

geography. Her main research centers on examining the intersection between the
development and usage of geospatial technologies and the sociopolitical conditions
in which these practices are situated. In particular, she has worked on three related
themes: investigating the sociopolitical implications of recent mapping practices
combined with Web 2.0 technologies, examining GIS-related practices in China’s

urban planning agencies, and examining public participation GIS practices in urban
governance.
Biographies of the Editors and Contributors                                      383


Grant McKenzie is a second year PhD student in the Department of Geography at
the University of California, Santa Barbara. He holds a Master of Applied Science
degree from the University of Melbourne (2008) and an Advanced Diploma in

Geographic Information Science from the British Columbia Institute of Technology
(2004). During his time in Melbourne, Grant was the recipient of the J H Mirams
Memorial Research Scholarship and was awarded a Google Doctoral Colloquium
Award and Scholarship for promising research proposal at the 2007 Conference on
Spatial Information Theory (COSIT 2007). Prior to starting his PhD, Grant was a

founding member of the Seattle-based start-up Spatial Development International
and worked as a geospatial software developer for the engineering consulting ﬁrm
CH2M HILL. Grant completed his BA in Geography at the University of British
Columbia in 2002.

Mark H. Palmeris an assistant professor of geography at the University of Missouri–
Columbia. His current research interests focus upon the social aspects of geographic
information systems including the uneven development of geographic information

networks within government agencies and their connections/disconnections within
local and indigenous communities in North America. Palmer is also interested in
understanding the dynamic interfaces between local knowledge systems, the geosci-
ences, and digital technologies like GIS, in hopes of determining how elements of
culture like language, storytelling, education, and performance inﬂuence the use and

understanding of geographic information. Since moving to the forested hills of
Missouri, Palmer has ofﬁcially retired from amateur storm chasing.

Barbara S. Pooreis a research geographer in the Center of Excellence in GIScience
at the US Geological Survey specializing in volunteered geographic information
and the use of social media in crowdsourced mapping. She has an AB in Art History
from Wellesley College, an AM in Art History from Brown University, and a PhD

in Geography from the University of Washington. Before embarking on a research
career, Barbara worked for the Federal Geographic Data Committee during the
establishment of the National Spatial Data Infrastructure. She lives and works by
the bay in Saint Petersburg, FL.

Stéphane Roche is a professor of geographical information sciences in the
Département des sciences géomatiques at the Université Laval, Québec, Canada.
Stéphane is a surveying engineer (ESGT, France). He did a Masters in Planning and

a PhD in Geography in the University of Angers (France). He is mainly interested in
the analysis of the relationships between space and society with regard to the devel-
opment process of the GeoWeb 2.0 and in the design of geospatial collaborative
solutions (participatory GIS, WikiGIS) to address participatory geodesign practices.
Stéphane coordinated with Claude Caron (University of Sherbrooke) for the book

“Organizational Facets of GIS,” published in 2009 by John Wiley and Sons. He was
also (with Rob Feick, University of Waterloo) guest editor of theGeomatica special
issue (vol. 64, n. 1) on volunteered geographic information. He is currently guest
editor (with Mike Goodchild, University of California, Santa Barbara) of the special
issue on geodesign of the International Journal of Geomatics and Spatial Analysis.
384                                           Biographies of the Editors and Contributors


Renee E. Sieber received her PhD from Rutgers University and is currently an
associate professor at McGill University in Montreal, Canada. Her prime research
focus is public participation geographic information systems (PPGIS), the methods

by which those who are marginalized from public policy can use computational
mapping and spatial databases to better participate in policy making. These indi-
viduals may be inner city or indigenous peoples. She brings to this a background as
a community organizer and activist as well as a computer programmer. She increas-
ingly researches PPGIS on the geospatial Web 2.0 (Geoweb). Her research areas are

diverse. She leads a team of 10 researchers in the use of the participatory Geoweb
for global environmental and climate change. She also conducts research inthe digital
humanities. She organized theﬁrst public participation GIS conference. She
cofounded the GIS specialty group of the Canadian Association of Geographers and
co-organized Spatial Knowledge and Information Canada, theﬁrst academic GIS

conference in Canada.
Jim Thatcher is a PhD candidate in Geography at Clark University. His research

focuses on the intersection of global capitalist systems and mobile geospatial tech-
nology. As the use of mobile geospatial technologies rises, what is known, what can
be known, and what can be done all shift for both the individual and the state. Jim’s
research focuses on how programmatic decisions can delimit the episteme of the
end user. He can be followed on twitter @alogicalfallacy.

Sayone Thihalolipavan worked with Christopher Goranson on alcohol-related
mapping projects in the past. He currently serves as the director of the Cessation

Unit at the Bureau of Chronic Disease Prevention and Tobacco Control at NYC
Department of Health and Mental Hygiene. He advises on BTC’s policy, clinical,
and educational interventions, ensuring conformity with current evidence and best
practices as well as helping to devise innovative strategies to deliver population ces-

sation interventions through direct mail, the internet, email, text messaging, and
other media including the annual nicotine and gum program which gives and serves
about 40,000 New Yorkers annually. He also oversees the employee smoking cessa-
tion clinic for any NYC government employee.

Eric B. Wolf has worked for over two decades in the software industry and is a
geographer in the Center of Excellence in GIScience at the US Geological Survey.
He does research on integrating citizen contributions into The National Map . Eric

has a BS in Applied Mathematics from the University of Tennessee at Chattanooga
and an MS in GIScience from Northwest Missouri State University. He is currently
a doctoral candidate at the University of Colorado at Boulder under the advisement
of Dr. Barbara P. Buttenﬁeld. His dissertation is focused on the structure of meta-
data for spatial data infrastructures that include volunteered geographic informa-

tion. Eric and his wife, Asha W. Wolf, live in Longmont, Colorado, with their dog
and two cats.

Alexander Zipf is chair of GIScience (geoinformatics) at Heidelberg University
since late 2009 and is a member of the Interdisciplinary Center for Scientiﬁc
Computing (IWR), the Heidelberg Center for the Environment (HCE), and the
Biographies of the Editors and Contributors                                      385


Department of Geography. He has previously been chair of cartography at University
of Bonn and, earlier, was professor for applied computer science and geoinformatics

at the University of Applied Sciences in Mainz, Germany. He has a background in
mathematics and geography andﬁnished his PhD at the EML European Media
Laboratory in Heidelberg. Current research interests include among others 3D GIS,
Spatial Data Infrastructures 2.0, as well as volunteered and crowdsourced geoinfor-

mation or location-based services (http://giscience.unihd.de).
        Index



















 A                                               Alcoholics Anonymous meeting , 335
 Aboriginal knowledge , 233–236                  Amazon.com , 48, 56
 Aboriginal people , 224, 229                    Android , 168–170, 348

 Absolute space , 135, 136                       Anonymity, 193
Accuracy, 8, 20, 22, 33, 39, 40, 58, 67, 70, 73, Anonymizing , 193
          74, 79, 98, 111–116, 161, 162, 189,    Anonymous users , 184
          233, 236, 251, 258, 259, 266, 267,     ANT.See Actor-network theory (ANT)

          271, 273, 275–277, 279, 281, 282,      Arti ﬁ cial intelligence , 127
          297, 302, 307, 310–315, 317, 325,     Attributes, 37, 39, 46, 47, 58, 60, 141,
          332, 335, 348                                   143–148, 156, 226, 245, 246, 249,
Action, 34, 69, 71, 74–78, 109, 161, 162,                 252, 257–259, 266, 271, 272, 276,

          164, 165, 168–171, 194, 226, 289,               280, 281, 304, 310–312, 317, 318,
          290, 293, 294, 296, 298, 308, 365,              321, 325, 330, 332, 334, 363
          367, 370                              Authoritative data, 72, 79, 247–248, 252, 314,
 Active community input , 309–311, 314                    321, 370
Active contribution, 112, 258, 268, 269,         Authoritative GI , 16, 18–25

          311–314                                Authoritative knowledge , 229, 232
 Activity topic , 208                           Authority, 61, 68, 252, 301, 319
Actor, 133, 165, 179, 288, 290, 292, 296         Authorship , 8, 175–195, 204
Actor-network theory (ANT), 8, 287–304, 370

Address, 2, 9, 26, 32, 66, 69, 73, 76, 78,
          85–87, 89, 92, 94, 95, 97, 98, 128,    B
          132, 136, 148, 162–165, 167, 170,      Bacon numbers , 133
          171, 178, 180, 183, 184, 189, 191,     BADUPCT.See Bureau of Alcohol and Drug

          192, 194, 195, 232, 251, 256, 258,              Use, Prevention, Care and
          266–268, 270–276, 278, 289, 310,                Treatment (BADUPCT)
          313, 325, 330, 332, 334–336, 338,     Behavior, 48, 61, 132, 135, 177, 187, 189,
          343, 344, 362–364                               193–195, 224, 278, 280, 309, 312,
Adoption, 7, 39, 52, 65–79, 170, 258, 330,                331, 332, 335, 337, 352, 364, 370

          339, 375                              Big data, 2–9, 333, 371, 372
 Aerial surveys , 248                           Bing, 4, 141, 147, 153, 163, 228, 258,
 Aeronautical charts , 247                                259, 330
Aggregate, 22, 33, 34, 57, 134, 161, 204, 207,     aerial imagery, 4, 143, 147, 258, 311

          209, 212, 228, 232, 280, 282, 331,       maps, 4, 56, 141, 147, 153, 163, 228, 330
          332, 336                               Blog.See weblog
 Alcohol , 331, 332, 335                         Border numbers , 133



D. Sui et al. (eds.), Crowdsourcing Geographic Knowledge: Volunteered Geographic         387
Information (VGI) in Theory and Practice, DOI 10.1007/978-94-007-4587-2,

© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2013
388                                                                                       Index


Bots, 177, 178, 180, 184, 191, 192               Communication, 6, 9, 21, 26, 44, 45, 58,

Bottlenecks, 44, 78, 164, 166, 171                          65–68, 78, 85, 89–91, 93–98, 100,
 Bottom-up ontology, 55, 58                                 106, 109, 111, 118, 171, 176, 178,
Boundaries, 16, 75, 86, 88, 97, 98, 100, 106,               180, 193, 195, 224, 227–229, 234,
          107, 134, 190, 191, 207, 225, 292,                237, 238, 257, 266, 295–299,

          310, 324, 332, 333, 336, 363,                     301, 302
          366, 368                               Communities of users, 44, 46, 49
Boundary, 75, 190, 324, 332, 336                 Community, 3, 17, 45, 68, 84, 107, 127,
 British Columbia , 223, 230, 232                           139, 177, 223, 248, 267, 309, 331,

 British Columbia Treaty Process , 234                      344, 372
 Bruno Latour, 289                                Community-based research (CBR) , 230
 Building footprints , 148–154, 249               Computational geography, 7, 125–136, 361
 Building generation , 150                        Computational social science , 127

 Built environment , 331                          Con ﬁ dential , 18, 24, 273, 280, 310, 333–335
Bureau of Alcohol and Drug Use,                   Connection to the land , 237
          Prevention, Care and Treatment         Constraints, 7, 47, 67–70, 72, 74–76, 78, 136,
          (BADUPCT) , 331                                   155, 166, 193, 251, 325, 365

                                                  Constructionism , 259
                                                  Constructivism , 359
 C                                               Content Standard for Geospatial Metadata
 Cadastral , 17, 247                                        (CSDGM) , 46, 47

 Callon, Michel , 289, 290                        Contestation , 85, 91, 92, 98
Canada, 19, 226, 228, 229, 234, 247,              Contour, 53, 211
          250, 313                               Contributors, 19, 23, 24, 26, 70–73, 76, 107,
 Carrier IQ , 335                                           112, 126, 141, 176–178, 182, 186,

Cartographer, 10, 226, 227, 293, 309                        193, 194, 228, 246, 250–252,
 Casual geographers , 309                                   255–258, 268, 281, 309, 310, 312,
 Cathedral and bazaar, 25                                   315–318, 323–326, 364, 366, 367,
Center of calculation, 288, 292–294,                        369, 371

          300–303                                 Conventional datasets , 248
 Changeset , 56, 57                               Co-production of data , 44, 46
 Charting , 246                                   Corporate Spatial Data Library, 253
 Chief Privacy Of ﬁ cer, 337                     Credibility, 73, 236, 251, 252, 256, 258,

China, 7, 83–100, 216, 362, 367                             297, 300
Citizen participation, 7, 65–68, 73, 78, 84, 85,  Crenulation , 53, 54
          91, 92, 100                             Crisis
Citizens, 2, 19, 35, 46, 65, 84, 109, 165, 228,      camps , 55

          245, 267, 288, 363                         mapping, 20, 92, 94, 161
   science, 2, 7, 84, 86, 105–120                    response, 8, 162, 164–167, 170, 171
   scientist, 66, 115, 118, 119,                 Critical GIS, 67, 85, 87, 99
          297–299, 368                           Crowdsourced, 2, 7, 16, 31–40, 45, 58, 66, 76,

    weather observers , 295                                 135, 204, 310–324, 367
Citizenship, 7, 85, 90–92, 98, 100, 281              compilation systems, 310, 315, 316, 319
Civic engagement, 85, 90, 99, 100, 367               data, 2, 7, 16, 31–40, 204, 312, 314, 315,
 Clearinghouse , 44, 47, 537                                317–319, 324, 325

Cloud, 2, 3, 20, 56, 69, 128, 177, 208, 232,         geodata , 139–158
          259, 298, 302, 330, 372                 CSDGM.See Content Standard for Geospatial
Cloud computing, 2, 3, 128, 259                             Metadata (CSDGM)
 Clustering algorithm , 134                      CUNY School of Public Health-Hunter

Collaboration, 19, 60, 76, 77, 94, 118–120,                 College , 331
          126, 178, 195, 230, 234, 248, 308,      Curators , 47
          330, 343, 368                           Curriculum , 343–350, 357
 Collective action , 194, 308, 367               Cyber infrastructure, 2, 9, 52, 278, 372
 Collective authorship , 175–179, 194             Cyborg , 87, 88, 288

 Colonization , 229                               Cycle of accumulation , 293
Index                                                                                     389


 D                                                E-governance , 66, 68, 91

 3D.See Three-dimensional (3D)                    Embedded metadata , 48–49
 Data extraction , 183, 184, 269                  Entropy, 205, 209–211, 215
 Data infrastructure , 366                      Erosion, 68, 71, 75, 238, 266
 Data integration , 47, 191, 192                 Error, 20, 22, 56, 61, 72–74, 95, 235, 251, 266,

 Data-intensive computing , 126, 127, 133                  268, 275, 276, 307, 310–316, 318,
Data mining, 127, 178, 180, 181, 184,                      319, 321, 323, 364
          192–194, 202, 204, 270, 280, 314,     eScience, 2, 37, 126, 127, 371
          321, 322                                Esri , 54

Data quality, 22, 23, 32, 38–40, 47, 52, 60, 73,Ethics, ethical problems, 17, 33, 35, 334, 337
          74, 76, 106, 113, 235, 247, 251,        Exa ﬂ ood , 1–10
          307–310, 312, 313, 315–321, 325,        Exploitation , 88, 333, 337
          339, 358, 364, 369                      Exploratory analysis , 206, 211

 Data sharing , 45, 191                         Exponential, 61, 126, 130, 182, 187, 188,
 Data spam , 310, 325                                      209, 335
 DE.See Digital earth (DE)                        Exponential decay, 182, 187, 209
 Death of distance , 9–10                       eXtensible Markup Language (XML), 49, 50,

Decision-making, 18, 19, 65–69, 72–79, 87,                 56, 111, 163, 348, 349
          109, 115, 126, 162, 165, 171, 224,
          227, 230, 278, 298
 De-identi ﬁ cation , 336–338                     F

 Densi ﬁ cation , 53                            Facebook, 3, 5, 24, 71, 136, 261, 271, 299,
 Dérives , 7, 25, 27                                       301, 372
Dialogue, 77, 224, 232, 235, 268, 290, 303, 367   Feature topic , 208
 Diaspora , 193, 223, 235                       Federal Geographic Data Committee,

 Diffusion , 77, 90, 187                                   44, 46, 363
 DigiPlace , 87–89, 92, 98–100                    Federal Privacy Rule , 336
 Digital commons , 176, 195                     Field, 7, 8, 21, 23, 24, 27, 47, 52, 54, 59, 61,
Digital divide, 1–10, 99, 100, 269, 280, 288,              72, 106, 111, 113, 125–128, 132,

          370, 371                                         161, 163, 187, 207, 211, 228, 249,
 Digital earth (DE) , 4                                    253, 256, 273, 275, 277, 288,
 DigitalGlobe , 55                                         294–299, 301–303, 312,
 Digital line graphs (DLGs) , 53                           314, 331, 332, 345, 346,

 Digital map maintenance , 248                             349, 350, 359, 362
Digital terrain model (DTM), 143, 146, 148      Findability, 44, 46, 49, 51, 52, 54,
 Digital traces , 193, 280                                 55, 58, 59
 Direct observation , 311                       First law of geography, 135, 209, 278, 365

Discourse, 7, 16, 85, 90, 91, 266, 278, 280,    Fitness-for-use, 6, 7, 16, 18, 22, 26, 33, 38–40,
          301, 363                                         52, 58, 315
 Displacement , 225, 226, 278                   Flickr, 3, 39, 136, 141, 180, 192, 304,
Distance decay, 8, 182, 184, 187, 188                      346, 350

 Distribution of volunteers , 316                 Folksonomies , 52
 Division of labor, 317                         Food Retail Expansion to Support Health
 DLGs.See Digital line graphs (DLGs)                       (FRESH) , 333
 Domestic violence , 335                          Fourth paradigm , 9, 126, 361–372

 3D-SLD.See 3D styled layer descriptor            FRESH.See Food Retail Expansion
          (3D-SLD)                                         to Support Health (FRESH)
 DTM.See Digital terrain model (DTM)
 Dublin Core , 179

                                                  G
                                                  Gazetteer, 58, 180, 191, 363
 E                                                Geoblogosphere , 45
 Edit wars , 192, 194                             GeoChat , 331, 345
Education, 3, 9, 25, 111, 112, 119, 280, 281,   Geo-coding, 9, 207, 276, 334, 335

          297, 317, 334, 341–359, 361             Geocomputation , 127
390                                                                                     Index


 Geo crowd sourcing                               GMM.See Google MapMaker (GMM)

 GeoEye , 55, 56                                Google, 3, 4, 10, 20, 33, 36, 37, 47, 51, 52,
 Geographic                                                54, 59, 74, 87, 88, 90, 92, 93,
   data, 1, 3, 18, 44, 60, 125, 140, 143, 180,             97, 176, 228, 246, 256–259,
          234, 273, 304, 313, 330, 332, 334,               279, 308, 311–314, 321–324,

          335, 337, 345, 363                               330, 333–335, 350, 352–354,
    proximity, 334                                         356, 358, 365, 372
    effects , 182, 194                          Google Earth, 4, 87, 88, 90, 92, 228,
   footprint, 334, 335, 338, 339                           313, 330

   forms and processes, 127, 128, 135, 136      Google MapMaker (GMM), 10, 36, 37, 59,
    imagination , 133                                      107, 245, 313, 322, 323, 365
Geographic information (GI), 2, 15, 31, 45,     Google Maps, 3, 10, 20, 69–71, 74, 86, 88, 92,
          68, 106, 125, 161, 178, 202, 227,                93, 95–97, 126, 163, 169, 207, 228,

          246, 288, 308, 330, 341, 362                     232, 245, 276, 312, 313, 321–323,
Geographic information science, 114, 125,                  330, 345, 347, 350, 352
          202, 334, 362,371                     Governance, 19, 66–70, 73, 74, 77–79, 90,
Geographic information systems (GIS), 68,                  91, 368

          106, 126, 204, 228, 303, 341, 363     Government, 2, 15, 33, 51, 65, 93, 118, 136,
Geographic Names Information System,                       165, 223, 246, 266, 288, 311,
          58, 180                                          330, 366
Geoinformatics, 126–128, 136, 139, 345–348,       Government mapping agencies ,

          351, 357                                         246, 248, 250
 Geolive , 232, 234, 235                          GPS.See Global positioning system (GPS)
 Geomatics , 127                                  GPS traces , 317
 Geometric center, 133                            Graduate studies , 9, 341–359

Geometry, 128, 129, 140, 141, 143, 148–154,       Gravity model , 184–189
          156, 179, 309, 310, 322, 324            Great circle distance , 189
Georeferencing, 179, 191, 192, 288,
          300–302, 304

 (Geo)slavery, 24, 87, 269                        H
Geospatial, 3, 21, 44, 66, 85, 126, 162, 191,   Haiti, 6, 20, 21, 46, 55, 56, 58, 59, 94,
          228, 246, 269, 287, 330, 345, 371                164, 165
Geospatial metadata, 7, 44–46, 49, 58             Have2p , 6

Geotag, 3, 4, 9, 20, 22, 34, 113, 141, 176,       Head/tail division rule , 132
          179–184, 186, 189–192, 258, 288,        Health Information Technology
          300, 302, 303, 346, 349–354,                     for Clinical and Economic
          356, 358                                         Health (HITECH) , 337

Geotagging, 9, 179, 180, 190–192, 288, 300,     Health Insurance Portability and
          302, 346, 349, 352, 354, 356, 358                Accountability Act (HIPAA),
GeoWeb, 2, 7, 16, 20, 24, 43–61, 66–71, 75,                336, 337
          84, 163, 223–238                      Health, public health, 8, 126, 329–339,

 Gibbs sampling , 205, 208                                 345, 362
GIScience, 2, 9, 17, 45, 52, 125, 127, 128,       Heavy-tailed distribution , 128, 130–133, 135
          191, 192, 289, 343, 345, 351, 357,      High-performance computing , 127, 128
          362, 364, 371–372                       HIPAA.See Health Insurance Portability and

GIS professional, 44, 45, 50, 51,                          Accountability Act (HIPAA)
          337, 338                                HITECH.See Health Information Technology
Global positioning system (GPS), 3, 107,                   for Clinical and Economic Health
          109–112, 115, 116, 126, 140, 141,                (HITECH)

          143, 148, 163, 169, 192, 193, 228,      HIV, 334, 335
          253, 258, 269, 288, 297, 299, 300,      Homophile , 6
          302, 309, 310, 312, 314, 317, 330,      HON Code of Conduct , 336
          332, 334, 343, 344, 346–349             Human geography topics , 204
 Global scale , 4, 191, 194                       Human mobility patterns , 132
Index                                                                                    391


Humans as sensors, 287, 288, 298, 301            L

Human-sensors, 288, 291, 294, 295, 297, 298,     Ladder of participation , 115
          300, 301, 303, 304                     Land claims , 224, 228, 231
 Human subjects , 114, 337, 338                  Land management , 66, 71
 Hybrid map compilation , 315–319               Latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA), 8, 203–209,

 Hydrography data , 53, 54                                215, 216, 219
                                                Latitude, 25, 56, 179, 191, 207, 302, 335, 336,
                                                          363, 368
 I                                               Latitude (Google) , 207, 335

Identity, 73, 89, 100, 223, 224, 226, 233, 236,  Law, John , 289
          237, 252, 279, 310, 335                LDA.See Latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA)
Incentives, 22, 73, 334, 342, 349, 350, 354,    Learning, 24–26, 53, 69–71, 117, 205, 228,
          355, 358                                        237, 270, 297, 342–347, 349,

 Indirect observation , 311                               357, 359
 Information ﬁ eld , 187                         Lego block , 7, 24–27
 Information production , 176–178, 249          Line, 38, 53, 86, 87, 119, 129, 188, 216, 252,
 Informed consent , 337                                   273, 299, 366

Innovation, 9, 20, 24–26, 78, 187, 205, 294      Linus’s Law, 126, 364
 InSTEDD , 331                                   Locality topic , 208, 216
 Institutional review board (IRB) , 336–339      Localization , 215–216, 252
 Intellectual property, 229, 249                Local knowledge, 66, 67, 72, 74, 86, 293,

 Intelligent crowd , 317                                  300, 310, 311, 315–317, 321,
Interactive, 7, 44–46, 48–49, 59, 89, 98, 99,             323, 325, 368
          176, 191, 192, 228, 256, 313           Local users , 310, 324
Intermediary, 59, 74, 237, 288, 290             Location, 4, 20, 31, 46, 66, 84, 106, 129, 148,

Internet, 2, 21, 38, 44, 65, 84, 105, 176, 228,           162, 178, 202, 224, 251, 267, 297,
          266, 288, 309, 370                              308, 330, 341, 363
Internet censorship, 6, 85, 91, 92, 97          Location-based services; location based
 IP geolocation , 184, 185, 193                           information, 2, 36, 46, 72,

 IRB.See Institutional review board (IRB)                 163, 189, 316, 330–332, 335,
                                                          338, 341
                                                Location entropy (of topic
 J                                                        distribution) , 211

 Java , 347                                      Lognormal , 130, 132
 Jensen-Shannon divergence , 205                 London underground map , 129
 Jumping scale , 74                             Longitude, 56, 179, 191, 207, 302, 335, 336,
Jurisdiction, 66, 68, 70, 74–76, 230, 245, 247,           363, 368

          248, 258, 259, 324

                                                 M
 K                                              Maintenance, 8, 20, 70, 119, 224, 236,

 K-12 , 341–359                                           248, 260
Kernel density estimation (KDE),                Mandate, 52, 69, 75, 77, 247, 248, 279, 307
          211, 212                              Map compilation, 249, 307, 309–311,
Keyhole Markup Language (KML),                            313–326

          78, 330, 347                           Map-mediated dialogue , 232, 367
Keyword, 47, 51, 52, 190, 270, 301              Mapping, 3, 16, 37, 45, 83, 107, 125, 141,
 KML.See Keyhole Markup                                   161, 176, 207, 224, 245, 266, 288,
          Language (KML)                                  307, 344, 365

Knowledge production, 2, 7, 10, 85, 86, 88,         party, 38, 39
          90, 92, 99, 100, 106, 118, 119, 176,      topics , 214
          233, 372                              Maps, 3, 20, 48, 68, 86, 112, 126, 140, 163,
 Knowledge transfer, 229, 330                             176, 207, 226, 245, 276, 288, 307,
 Kullback-Liebler divergence , 205                        330, 344, 363
392                                                                                  Index


 MapShare , 253, 255–256                       Navigation, 25, 34, 112, 129, 176, 256, 270,

 Maptivism , 86, 87                                      307–326
Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC), 205           NAVTEQ, 245, 246, 250, 256, 308, 311, 313,
Markup language, 47, 158, 179, 183, 192                  314, 319, 320
Mashup, 26, 70, 86, 92, 95, 96, 126, 163, 192,  NCGIA , 2

          232, 266                              Nearness , 194
 MCMC.See Markov chain Monte Carlo             Neighborhood, 39, 167, 257, 278, 330–333, 344
          (MCMC)                                Neocartography, 330
 Measuring work (edit count) , 193             Neogeographer, 45, 46, 49–52, 60, 72, 372

Media, 5, 20, 34, 45, 71, 89, 112, 128, 177,    Neogeographic datasets , 246
          228, 246, 270, 288, 313, 330, 368    Neogeography, 2, 49, 50, 52, 59, 84, 92, 194,
 Medial axis , 133                                       246, 330
 MediaWikimetadata , 182                        Neoliberalization , 66

 Memories , 224–226, 230, 231, 235–238          NES.See Notiﬁcation for Edit Service (NES)
Metadata, 7, 38, 43, 168, 179, 257, 267,        Netizen , 91, 92, 99
          325, 369                             Network, 8, 18, 25, 53, 55, 109, 111, 131, 132,
 Metadata squared , 43–61                                163, 193–195, 250, 253, 268, 273,

Metadata standards, 44, 47, 50, 52, 60, 191              288, 290–292, 294–296, 298–300,
 Meteorologist , 288, 294, 296, 298–304                  302, 304, 319, 326, 339, 346,
 Microformat , 179                                       358, 359
Microsoft, 4, 33, 228, 259, 308, 330, 334, 336  Neutral point of view, 177

 MINUSTAH.See United Nations Stabilization     New media, 46, 47, 49, 78, 89, 90, 100, 194,
          Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)                    246, 368
 Mobile application , 278, 343                 New York City Department of Health and
 Mobile Device Privacy Act , 335                         Mental Hygiene (NYC DOHMH),

Mode of information, 85, 89–90, 98, 100                  331, 332
Motivations, 9, 19, 23, 24, 67, 68, 113, 114,   NLP.See Natural language processing (NLP)
          117, 251, 268, 277, 281, 304, 342,    NOAA.See National Oceanic and Atmospheric
          349–351, 353, 357, 358, 363                    Administration (NOAA)

Multimedia, 84, 232, 237, 270, 279, 370         Non-expert , 45, 70, 72–74
 Municipal government , 74, 75, 77              Normal distribution , 130, 132, 135
 Murphy’s law, 6                                Noti ﬁ cation for Edit Service (NES) , 253
                                                NSERC.See Natural Sciences and

                                                         Engineering Research Council
 N                                                       of Canada (NSERC)
 Named streets , 131                            NSSL.See National Severe Storms
 National Hydrography Dataset , 54                       Laboratory (NSSL)

 National Institutes of Health , 337            NWS.See National Weather Service (NWS)
National Map, 45, 46, 58, 125, 247, 253,       NYC Department of City Planning,
          367, 368                                       332, 333
 National Map Corps , 253–255, 257              NYC DOHMHS.ee New York City

National Oceanic and Atmospheric                         Department of Health and Mental
          Administration (NOAA) , 296–298                Hygiene (NYC DOHMH)
National Science Foundation, 334, 342, 371      NYC Economic Development
National Severe Storms Laboratory (NSSL),                Corporation , 333

          295, 297                              NYC Projection Area , 332
 National Weather Service (NWS) , 288
 Natural cities , 133–135
 Natural language , 201–219                     O

Natural language processing (NLP),              Object-level metadata , 55, 56, 281
          202, 272, 369                         Occupy wall street , 23
 Natural Resources Canada , 19                 Ofﬁce of the National Coordinator for Health
 Natural streets , 131                                   Information Technology
 Nautical charts , 247                                   (ONCHIT) , 336, 337
Index                                                                                       393


 OGC.See Open Geospatial                           Personally identi ﬁ able information ,

          Consortium (OGC)                                  333–335, 338
 OLPC.See One Laptop Per Child (OLPC)             Personal travel history; travel paths,
 ONCHIT.See Ofﬁce of the National                           334–336
          Coordinator for Health Information      Photographs, 38, 84, 97, 98, 105, 126, 176,

          Technology (ONCHIT)                               230, 232, 233, 237, 304, 368
One Laptop Per Child (OLPC), 347                   PHR.See Personal health record (PHR)
Online mapping, 45, 49, 84, 86, 87, 92, 99,        Physical geography topics , 215
          176, 180, 224, 312                      Place, 7, 16, 54, 66, 87, 112, 132, 142, 162,

Ontology, 27, 52, 55, 58, 61, 168, 270                      176, 201, 223, 251, 266, 289, 311,
 OpenDataKit , 331, 335                                     332, 349, 362
Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC),                  Place-names , 215, 302, 363
          143, 147, 148, 158, 330                  Platial , 362–364, 367–370

Open source, 20, 25, 45, 46, 51, 56, 60, 61, 77,   POI.See Point-of-Interests (POI)
          87, 93, 106, 162, 167, 170, 182,        Point, 7, 19, 21, 35, 36, 51, 56, 88, 96, 111,
          232, 246, 257, 331, 344, 369                      112, 141, 152, 176, 177, 179, 201,
OpenStreetMap (OSM), 7, 20–22, 25, 27, 32,                  207, 211, 212, 216, 225, 227, 234,

          34, 37–39, 45, 52, 55, 59–61, 88,                 235, 251, 252, 258, 276, 318, 332,
          100, 107, 112, 126, 128, 131, 134,                334, 335, 342, 356, 363, 367, 369
          136, 140, 156–158, 161, 165, 245,       Point-of-Interests (POI), 142, 143, 148, 307,
          251, 255, 267, 269, 312, 315–317,                 343, 346

          319, 323, 330, 342–343, 358–346,        Polygon, 141, 148, 179, 211, 212, 215, 300,
          351, 354, 357, 358, 365–367                       303, 330, 332
 OpenTopography, 4                                 Population dynamics , 266, 273, 279
 Opportunity costs , 71                           Portal, 3, 47, 237, 278, 343

 Ordnance Survey, 248                             Positional accuracy, 22, 58, 189, 251, 252,
Organization, 18, 19, 21, 44, 46, 47, 52–55,                276, 307, 310, 315, 317
          67–71, 75, 77, 78, 84–86, 91, 93,        Positioning , 251, 252, 343
          98–100, 167, 171, 178, 202, 207,         PostGIS , 2

          227, 235, 245–251, 253, 255–260,        Power law, 6, 128, 130, 134, 135, 177
          288, 289, 294, 296, 301, 307, 324,      Power law distribution, 128, 130,
          337–339, 347, 368                                 134, 177
 OSM.See OpenStreetmap (OSM)                      Power relations, 7, 84–86, 100, 106,

OSM-3D, 140, 143, 144, 147–150, 152, 154,                   115, 177
          156–158                                  PPGIS.See Public participation
                                                            GIS (PPGIS)
                                                  Precision, 20, 73, 113, 114, 192, 271, 272

 P                                                Privacy, 8, 17, 21, 24, 33–36, 39, 40, 67, 84,
Participation, 7, 16, 32, 56, 65, 83, 105,                  86, 87, 193, 229, 232, 234, 247,
          140, 194, 225, 267, 288, 308,                     252, 266, 268, 269, 273, 279–282,
          338, 342, 367                                     333–338, 354, 372

 Participatory culture , 325–326                      policy, 36
 Participatory geoweb , 226                           rule , 336–338
Participatory GIS, 106, 115, 119, 367              Private good , 17, 18
Participatory mapping, 8, 83–100, 107, 224,       Private sector, 19, 87, 250, 258, 268, 369

          226–228, 232, 235, 236                   Privatization , 301
Participatory VGI, 84–86, 92, 100, 119, 358        Procedural extrusion , 153
Passive community input, 309–310, 321, 325         Produsage , 249
Passive contribution, 258, 269, 310, 321           Produsers , 22, 25, 164, 249

 Peer production , 178                             Public good , 17, 18
 People- ﬁ nder sites , 266–268, 270–272, 275, Public health, 8, 126, 329–339, 345, 362
          277, 280                                Public health researcher, 331, 333, 334, 339
 Personal health record (PHR) , 336               Public participation GIS (PPGIS), 7, 16, 23,
 Personal location data , 4                                 67, 68, 78, 83–100, 140, 194
394                                                                                     Index


Public sector, 4, 19, 21, 22, 246, 258–259      Science and technology studies

 Public-sector mapping , 246, 258–259                      (STS) , 289
 Public sphere , 90, 92, 100, 118                 SDI.See Spatial data infrastructures (SDI)
                                                  Secondary school , 341–343
                                                  Self-synchronization , 309, 318

 Q                                                Semantic similarityS.ee Similarity
Qualitative, 17–19, 45, 61, 73, 113, 128, 143,    Semantic Web , 2, 170, 270
          145, 156, 164, 228, 232, 233, 235,    Sense of place, 8, 176, 203, 204, 209,
          237, 276, 331, 356, 368–370                      223–238

Qualitative information, 113, 143, 145, 231     Sensor network, 3, 46, 295, 298
Quality assurance, 247, 249–256, 272, 312,      Sensors, 3, 34, 46, 66, 289, 295, 298, 301,
          362, 364, 365, 369                               304, 311
 Quebec , 19, 67, 68, 75, 79                      Sentinel , 333, 335

                                                  Serendipity, 25, 27
                                                  SES.See Socioeconomic Status (SES)
 R                                                Severe weather, 288, 292–304
 Radar, 294, 295, 298, 300–303                  Short message service (SMS), 20, 39,

 Realistic 3D models , 143, 150                            331, 347
Region, 75, 140, 154, 190, 202, 207, 215, 231,    Signature distance , 183, 188–190, 193
          275, 295, 297                         Similarity, 8, 115, 193, 205, 209, 210, 217,
 Regional geography, 184, 202                              218, 272, 273

 Registered users , 141, 232, 313               Simulation, 89, 127, 128, 136, 208, 212, 216,
 Relative entropyS.ee Kullback-Liebler                     290, 292–294
          divergence                              Situated knowledge , 53
 Relative space , 135                             Situated learning , 53, 359

Reliability, 236, 252, 256, 258, 259, 276, 295,   Six degrees of separation , 5
          314, 367, 369                         Six Rivers National Forest, 53, 54
Representation, 8, 16, 84, 88, 89, 96, 98, 100,   SKYWARN , 294, 297
          130, 135, 162, 164, 165, 191, 207,    Smart phones, 2, 3, 7, 32, 33, 163, 193,

          211, 218, 219, 227, 249, 251, 252,               297, 330, 331, 335, 336, 343,
          257, 280, 288, 302, 303, 332, 344,               348, 350
          368–370                                 SMS.See Short Message Service (SMS)
Research, 2, 17, 33, 44, 67, 84, 109, 126, 141,   SNI.See Supermarket need index (SNI)

          162, 176, 202, 224, 251, 265, 287,      Snow, John , 334
          312, 331, 343, 361                      Social capital , 233
Resistance, 68, 89, 91, 92, 97, 98, 226           Social economy, 79
 Resource cost , 70, 71                         Social media, 5, 71, 128, 135, 136, 281,

 Return on investment (ROI) , 18–20                        298, 368
 Revenge of geography, 9–10                     Social networking, 34, 55, 67, 92, 93, 96, 98,
 Reverse geocoding , 334, 335                              228, 233, 252, 267, 268, 277, 279,
Revisions, 182–184, 188, 192, 249, 252, 253,               290, 301, 304, 308

          281, 312, 321, 322, 366               Social networking sites, 34, 92, 93, 96, 98,
 RFID , 3, 32                                              252, 268, 279, 301, 304
Risk, 25, 73, 88, 118, 250–257, 294, 334, 335,  Social networks, 23, 34, 52, 55, 67, 92, 93, 96,
          337, 338                                         98, 193, 195, 228, 233, 234, 250,

 ROI.See Return on investment (ROI)                        252, 266–268, 277–279, 290, 301,
 Routing , 130, 148, 258, 312                              304, 308, 326, 350, 358, 359
                                                  Social security number, 339
                                                  Socioeconomic Status (SES) ,

 S                                                         193, 331
 Scale free , 130, 177                            Software-as-a-service (SaaS) , 69
Scaling, 128–133, 135, 136, 279, 370            Space, 7, 8, 21, 25, 86, 89, 126, 128, 130, 132,
Scaling of geographic space, 128, 130,                     135, 136, 140, 147, 162–166, 169,
          132, 135                                         176, 189, 202, 203, 219, 278, 289,
Index                                                                                     395


          292, 295, 298, 302, 309, 344,           Temporal

          362–364                                   data , 335, 338
 Space-time convergence , 5                         proximity, 334
Spatial analysis, 70, 71, 126, 193, 207,          Temporal analysis , 203, 216–217
          276, 370                                TerraServer, 4

 Spatial autocorrelation , 135, 203               Text analysis , 206
 Spatial century, 9                               Thematic geography, 202
Spatial data infrastructures (SDI), 6, 16, 18,    Third dimension , 139–158
          19, 44–46, 51, 52, 61, 66, 158, 178,  Three-dimensional (3D), 7, 140, 141, 143,

          191–193, 369                                     144, 146–150, 152–158, 176
 Spatial data mining , 193                          building models, 143, 148–150,
Spatial data quality, 22, 106, 315                         153, 156
 Spatial footprint , 184–188                        city models, 141, 156

 Spatial heterogeneity, 130, 135, 202               navigation , 176
 Spatial information theory,                        routing , 148
          127, 187                                  VGI , 156
 Spatial interaction model , 184, 187           3D styled layer descriptor (3D-SLD), 148

Spatial pattern, 182, 184, 194, 277               TIGER.See Topologically integrated
 Spatial resolution , 300–303                              geographic encoding and
 Spatial Thinking , 135, 342, 343                          referencing (TIGER)
 SPC.See Storm Prediction                         Time-space compression , 4, 5

          Center (SPC)                            Time-space distanciation , 4
 SPOT map , 334                                   TIP.See Tornado Intercept Project (TIP)
 Spotter Network , 294, 299, 301                Tlowitsis Nation, 223, 224, 226, 230, 232
State control, 85, 91, 92, 100                    Tobler’s ﬁ rst law, 203, 209, 278

 State of Victoria, Australia , 253             Tobler’s First Law of Geography,
 STD , 335                                                 203, 209, 278
 Storm Prediction Center (SPC) , 297            TomTom, 20, 245, 246, 250, 253, 255–256,
 Straight skeleton , 153                                   258, 308, 310, 313, 314

 Strategic planning , 69                          Top-down schema , 58
 Street block , 132–133                         Topic model, 8, 202–206, 208, 217
 Street nodes , 134                               Topic trend , 217
Streets, 23, 45, 55, 71, 126, 129–135, 141,     Topographic, 8, 40, 53, 135, 230, 245–260,

          142, 147, 155, 193, 211, 218, 267,               308, 312
          271, 272, 275, 279, 310–312, 322,       Topological center, 133
          324, 325, 330, 334, 336, 363            Topologically integrated geographic
Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and                  encoding and referencing

          Threats (SWOT) , 6                               (TIGER) , 129, 269
 Subjectivity, 85, 88–90, 252                     Topology, 128–131, 136
 Supermarket need index (SNI) , 333               Toponym , 180, 191, 278
Survey, 4, 9, 97, 105, 107, 108, 193, 248, 253,   Tornado , 294–296, 298–303

          268, 270, 273, 275–279, 293, 312,       Tornado alley, 295
          313, 331, 332, 335, 342, 346,           Tornado Intercept Project (TIP) , 295
          350–358, 364                            Totable Tornado Observatory
 SWOT.See Strengths, Weaknesses,                           (TOTO) , 295

          Opportunities, and Threats (SWOT)       TOTO.See Totable Tornado Observatory
 Symbology, 93, 96, 344                                    (TOTO)
 Synthesis hybridity, 368–370                   Translation, 53, 78, 97, 288, 290–292, 294,
                                                           298–300, 302–304

                                                Trust, 38, 56, 61, 79, 97, 108, 112, 114, 115,
 T                                                         170, 234, 236, 249–252, 256, 275,
Tag, 56–58, 177, 288, 348, 349                             279, 311, 312, 314, 319, 322, 323
 TeleAtlas , 256, 257, 308, 313                 Twitter, 3, 37, 70, 71, 73, 95–97, 136, 202,
 Templates , 90, 179, 180, 183                             299, 301, 302, 370
396                                                                                  Index


 U                                             Volunteered geographic information (VGI)

Uncertainty, 22–24, 26, 27, 114, 120, 273,        heterogeneity, 22, 26, 27, 366
          364, 378                                quality, 362, 364–365
 Undergraduate students , 296, 357                value , 15–27
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti  Volunteered geographic services (VGS), 7, 8,

          (MINUSTAH) , 59                               161–171
United States Geological Survey                 VORTEX.See Veriﬁcation of the Origins of
          (USGS), 2, 45, 53, 58, 61,                    Rotation in Tornadoes Experiment
          253–255, 293                                  (VORTEX)

Updating, 8, 47, 58, 95, 106, 165, 246, 247,    VRML , 147, 154
          249–251, 253, 256, 257, 260, 281,
          311, 313, 320
Usability, 43–61, 155, 227, 330, 350, 354,      W

          356, 357, 359                         WARNGEN , 303
 User-created content , 246, 270                Water Hackathon , 10
User-generated content, 2, 23, 125, 126, 161,   W3DS.See Web 3D Service (W3DS)
          164, 178, 246, 362                   Web 2.0, 2, 3, 7, 9, 16, 25, 26, 46, 65–67,

User interface, 74, 142, 206, 330, 350                  83–100, 125, 140, 161–164, 228,
 USGS.See United States Geological Survey               233, 236, 246, 249, 266, 267, 277,
          (USGS)                                        288, 300, 369
                                                Web crawling , 176

                                                Web demographics , 8, 265–282, 362
 V                                             Web 3D Service (W3DS), 143, 147, 148
 Value chain , 19, 20, 24–26                   Weblog, 45, 50, 95, 97, 202, 206, 209, 211,
 Value, de ﬁ nitions                                    215, 216, 288

    economic perspective , 16–20                Web-scraping , 266, 270
    philosophical perspective , 17             Web 2.0 technologies, 100, 125, 277
 Value, type                                   Wiki, 55–59, 126, 142, 175, 177, 180, 182,
    economic value , 18–20                              183, 191, 194, 195, 344, 348, 366

    qualitative value , 17–19                   Wiki ﬁ cation , 85, 178, 234
   social value, 16, 20, 21                    Wikipedia, 3, 8, 55, 56, 113, 126, 163, 175–195,
 Vancouver Island , 223                                 202, 252, 257, 281, 364, 365
Vector, 4, 207, 258, 330, 346                  Wikipedian, 177, 178, 183, 187, 189, 193, 194

 Veri ﬁ able , 58, 107                          Wikipedia-World , 180, 184
Veriﬁcation of the Origins of Rotation in       Wikiscanner, 178, 258
          Tornadoes Experiment (VORTEX),       Wikitext markup language, 179, 180, 183
          295, 296                              Wise crowds , 314

 VGS.See Volunteered geographic services        Work ﬂ ow, 52, 71, 181, 189, 246, 249–257
          (VGS)                                 WorldWind , 4
 Virtual Earth , 4, 330
Virtual globe, 140, 143, 144, 343

 Virtual personas , 235                         X
 Virtual spaces , 128, 135                      XML.See eXtensible Markup Language
Visualization, 89, 99, 127, 128, 136, 140, 143,         (XML)
          148, 154, 161, 163, 194, 207, 208,    XNavigator, 143, 144, 148

          211, 369
Volunteer, 21, 24, 31–40, 46, 55, 66, 91,
          94, 112–114, 116, 117, 245,           Z
          250–251, 253, 255, 257,               Zettabyete , 3

          267, 269, 295, 296, 317,             ZIP Code, 271, 332, 333, 335
          331, 367                              Zipf’s Law, 133–135, 177, 271