Comparative Bacterial Genomics




                           by



                 Nicholas James Loman




                 A thesis submitted to the
                 University of Birmingham

                     for the degree of
               DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY





                                      School of Biosciences

                    College of Life and Environmental Sciences
                                  University of Birmingham
                                                May 2012
            University of Birmingham Research Archive


                             e-theses repository


This unpublished thesis/dissertation is copyright of the author and/or third
parties. The intellectual property rights of the author or third parties in respect
of this work are as defined by The Copyright Designs and Patents Act 1988 or
as modified by any successor legislation.


Any use made of information contained in this thesis/dissertation must be 
 in
accordance with that legislation and must be properly acknowledged. Further
distribution or reproduction in any format is prohibited without the permission
of the copyright holder.
For Anya Grace
                  Acknowledgements




I would like to thank all of my colleagues from the Schools of Bio-
sciences and Immunity and Infection, particularly members of the

Pallen/Penn research group, including Charles Penn for supervision
and advice and Chrystala Constantinidou for sequencing. I would

like to acknowledge all those who contributed to the studies presented

here: Thomas Lewis, Pauline Jumaa, Debbie Mortiboy, Michael Hornsey,
Lewis Bingle, Matthew Ellington, Jane Turton, Anthony Underwood,

Tom Gaulton, Claire Thomas, Michel Doumith, David Livermore,
Neil Woodford, Holger Rohde, Ruifu Yang, Martin Aepfelbacher, the

scientists at the Beijing Genomics Institute, Rebecca Gladstone, Jo-

hanna Je▯eries, Chrystala Constantinidou, Anna Tocheva, Leigh O’Connor,
Jackie Chan, Saul Faust and Stuart Clarke. Special thanks are due to

Brendan Wren at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine
and George Weinstock at the Washington University Genomics Cen-

tre for funding and resourcing my ▯rst forays into high-throughput
sequencing.

Thanks to my mum and dad for constant nagging about ▯nishing my

PhD and help proof-reading this manuscript. Thanks to Hannah for

proof-reading this manuscript and pretty much everything else.

Finally, thanks to Mark Pallen for introducing me to microbial pathogenomics
and providing mentorship, support and constructive abuse over the

past 14 years.
                           Abstract




For the most part, diagnostic clinical microbiology still relies on 19th
century ideas and techniques, particularly microscopy and laboratory

culture. In this thesis I investigate the utility of a new approach,
whole-genome sequencing (WGS), to tackle current issues in infectious

disease. I present four studies. The ▯rst demonstrates the utility of

WGS in a hospital outbreak of Acinetobacter baumannii. The second
study uses WGS to examine the evolution of drug resistance following

antibiotic treatment. I then explore the use of WGS prospectively dur-
ing an international outbreak of food-borne Escherichia coli infection,

which caused over 50 deaths. The ▯nal study compares the perfor-

mance of benchtop sequencers applied to the genome of this outbreak
strain and touches on the issue of whether WGS is ready for routine

use by clinical and public health laboratories. In conclusion, through
this programme of work, I provide ample evidence that whole-genome

sequencing of bacterial pathogens has great potential in clinical and
public health microbiology. However, a number of technical and logis-

tical challenges have yet to be addressed before such approaches can

become routine.
Contents






Contents                                                                      iv

1 Critical review                                                              1

   1.1   Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1.

         1.1.1  The ▯rst golden age of microbiology . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
                1.1.1.1  The microbial world . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   1

                1.1.1.2  Public health and vaccinology . . . . . . . . . . .   1
                1.1.1.3  The birth of medical microbiology    . . . . . . . .  2

                1.1.1.4  Bacterial classi▯cation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
                1.1.1.5  Numerical taxonomy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    4

         1.1.2  The second golden age of microbiology . . . . . . . . . . .    5

                1.1.2.1  Genetics and evolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
                1.1.2.2  Molecular biology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6

                1.1.2.3  Sequencing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
                1.1.2.4  Molecules as documents of evolutionary history .      7

         1.1.3  Bacterial genomics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9

                1.1.3.1  Bacterial genome dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . .    10
                1.1.3.2  Bacterial clonality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .10

         1.1.4  Clinical microbiology in the 21st century . . . . . . . . . . 11
                1.1.4.1  The practice of clinical microbiology . . . . . . .  11

                1.1.4.2  The threat of antibiotic resistance . . . . . . . . .12

                1.1.4.3  Bacterial epidemiology and bacterial typing . . .    13
         1.1.5  High-throughput sequencing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15








                                       iv
                                                              CONTENTS



             1.1.5.1  Bioinformatics analysis of high-throughput sequenc-

                      ing data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
             1.1.5.2  Genomic epidemiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   18

1.2  Present work    . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20.
     1.2.1   Aim of the studies  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20

             1.2.1.1  High-throughput whole-genome sequencing to dis-

                      sect the epidemiology of Acinetobacter baumannii
                      isolates from a hospital outbreak . . . . . . . . .  21

             1.2.1.2  Whole-genome comparison of two Acinetobacter
                      baumannii isolates from a single patient, where

                      resistance developed during tigecycline therapy .    21

             1.2.1.3  Open-Source Genomic Analysis of Shiga-Toxin Pro-
                      ducing E. coli O104:H4    . . . . . . . . . . . . . .22

             1.2.1.4  Performance comparison of benchtop high-throughput

                      sequencing platforms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
1.3  Results and discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .23

     1.3.1   Paper I   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23.
             1.3.1.1  Can whole-genome sequencing be used for bacte-

                      rial typing? Is there variation between isolates

                      within a small outbreak and can this variation
                      be detected reliably?   Can the high resolution

                      o▯ered by whole-genome sequencing be used for

                      ▯ne-grained epidemiological typing within short
                      timescales? (days, weeks or months) . . . . . . .    23

             1.3.1.2  Can such information be used to resolve alterna-
                      tive infection control hypotheses, for example by

                      shedding light on chains of transmission? . . . . .  24

             1.3.1.3  What are the limitations of this method? . . . . .   25
     1.3.2   Paper II . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .26

             1.3.2.1  How do strains evolve during infection of a single
                      patient and during antibiotic treatment? . . . . .   26









                                    v
                                                                CONTENTS



                1.3.2.2  Can whole-genome sequencing provide testable hy-

                         potheses as to mechanisms of antibiotic resistance
                         in a case of treatment failure? . . . . . . . . . .26

        1.3.3   Paper III  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .27 .
                1.3.3.1  What is the evolutionary origin of the German E.

                         coli O104:H4 outbreak strain? . . . . . . . . . . .27

                1.3.3.2  How does this strain di▯er from classical entero-
                         haemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC)? What genetic fac-

                         tors might be responsible for the high levels of
                         mortality in this outbreak? . . . . . . . . . . . .28

                1.3.3.3  How can whole-genome sequencing be used prospec-

                         tively during an international outbreak? . . . . . 28
                1.3.3.4  Crowd-sourcing and prospects for future outbreaks 29

        1.3.4   Paper IV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .31 .

                1.3.4.1  How do the current benchtop sequencing plat-
                         forms compare for the purpose of epidemiology

                         and evolution studies in bacteria? . . . . . . . . 31
                1.3.4.2  What are the technical obstacles in analysing draft

                         genome sequence data? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .31

                1.3.4.3  What are the practical limitations of current whole-
                         genome sequencing platforms for genomic epidemi-

                         ology and evolution? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31

   1.4  Concluding statements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32

2 High-throughput whole-genome sequencing to dissect the epi-

   demiology of Acinetobacter baumannii isolates from a hospital
   outbreak                                                                48


3 Whole-genome comparison of two Acinetobacter baumannii iso-

   lates from a single patient, where resistance developed during
   tigecycline therapy                                                     62


4 Open-Source Genomic Analysis of Shiga-Toxin Producing E. coli

   O104:H4                                                                 80





                                      vi
                                                              CONTENTS



5 Performance comparison of benchtop high-throughput sequenc-

   ing platforms                                                        112

6 Statement of contribution to work                                     154

   6.1  Paper I . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 154
   6.2  Paper II . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 154

   6.3  Paper III . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 154

   6.4  Paper IV . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 155














































                                     vii
List of Papers




   2.1  Lewis T*, Loman NJ*, Bingle L, Jumaa P, Weinstock GM, Mort-
        iboy D, Pallen MJ. High-throughput whole-genome sequencing to

        dissect the epidemiology of Acinetobacter baumannii isolates from

        a hospital outbreak. J Hosp Infect. 2010 May;75(1):37-41. Epub
        2010 Mar 17. PubMed PMID: 20299126.       . . . . . . . . . . . . 49


   3.1  Hornsey M*, Loman N*, Wareham DW, Ellington MJ, Pallen MJ,
        Turton JF, Underwood A, Gaulton T, Thomas CP, Doumith M,

        Livermore DM, Woodford N. Whole-genome comparison of two
        Acinetobacter baumannii isolates from a single patient, where resis-

        tance developed during tigecycline therapy. J Antimicrob Chemother.
        2011 Jul;66(7):1499-503. Epub 2011 May 12. PubMed PMID:

        21565804. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63. .

   4.1  Rohde H*, Qin J*, Cui Y*, Li D*, Loman NJ*, Hentschke M, Chen

        W, Pu F, Peng Y, Li J, Xi F, Li S, Li Y, Zhang Z, Yang X, Zhao M,
        Wang P, Guan Y, Cen Z, Zhao X, Christner M, Kobbe R, Loos S,

        Oh J, Yang L, Danchin A, Gao GF, Song Y, Li Y, Yang H, Wang

        J, Xu J, Pallen MJ, Wang J, Aepfelbacher M, Yang R; E. coli
        O104:H4 Genome Analysis Crowd-Sourcing Consortium. Open-

        source genomic analysis of Shiga-toxin-producing E. coli O104:H4.
        N Engl J Med. 2011 Aug 25;365(8):718-24. Epub 2011 Jul 27.

        PubMed PMID: 21793736.      . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81.









                                     viii
                                                    LIST OF PAPERS



5.1  Loman NJ, Misra RV, Dallman TJ, Constantinidou C, Gharbia

     SE, Wain J, Pallen MJ. Performance comparison of benchtop high-
     throughput sequencing platforms. Nat Biotechnol. 2012 Apr 22.

     doi: 10.1038/nbt.2198.  [Epub ahead of print] PubMed PMID:
     22522955. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 113


* Joint ▯rst authors
















































                                  ix
Chapter 1



Critical review




1.1    Introduction


1.1.1   The ▯rst golden age of microbiology

     \Progress in science depends upon new techniques, new discoveries
     and new ideas, probably in that order." { Sydney Brenner [1]


1.1.1.1 The microbial world

In the 1670s, when Antonie van Leeuwenhoek turned his home-made microscopes
on water samples and dental plaque, he found himself staring at the wonderful

and varied shapes of his \animalcules", now classi▯ed as protists and bacteria
[2]. Wherever he looked, whether it was at urine or water, muscle tissue or
seminal uid, he uncovered a microscopic biological world unimagined at this

time. His innovative use of the new technique of microscopy earned him the title
of \founding father of microbiology" [3]. However, the impact of his discoveries

on those dying of infectious diseases remained minimal for two hundred years.

1.1.1.2 Public health and vaccinology

In 1854, when John Snow removed the handle from a water pump on Broad Street,

London, he helped stop an outbreak of cholera, but without really understanding
its cause. Although there had been suggestions that microbes might cause dis-





                                 1
                                                          INTRODUCTION



ease (by Fracastoro and Bassi, amongst others [4]), the generally accepted view

was that miasma, or bad air, was the cause of transmissable diseases. Snow’s
intervention was informed through his pioneering use of a modern-style epidemi-

ology study. He observed and carefully mappped clusters of cases of cholera in
households which drew their water from the Broad Street pump [5]. In remov-

ing the handle and ending the outbreak, he provided strong evidence that it

was water, not air transmitting the cholera. The very same year, Filippo Pacini,
after studying a large cholera outbreak in Padua published his ▯ndings of a water-

borne comma-shaped bacillus he called vibrio, identifying it both as the \speci▯c"
cause of cholera as well as demonstrating that it was contagious. However, he

was ignored by the scienti▯c community, with his contribution recognised only

posthumously [6].


1.1.1.3   The birth of medical microbiology

Hansen made the link between rod-shaped bodies in lepromatous nodules and

leprosy in 1873 but, like Pacini, received little initial support for his theory [7].
Instead, Robert Koch did most to popularise the germ theory of disease. Koch

made three major discoveries linking microbes to important human diseases: ▯rst,

the link between a sporulating bacillus and anthrax; second, that the tubercule
bacillus caused tuberculosis; and, third, he rediscovered a vibrio as the cause of

cholera, unaware of Pacini’s earlier work. Koch, working with Henle forged a
conceptual framework for evaluating the link between microbes and disease by

the formulation of a set of \postulates", which could be used to assess whether

a particular agent caused a given disease. Koch, with fellow German Ferdinand
Cohn, also pioneered the growth of pure cultures of bacteria on solid media, a

line of work which eventually culminated in the present-day use of agar.

   In parallel with Koch’s studies, Louis Pasteur took on the theory of sponta-
neous generation as an explanation of the origin of microbial life. Pasteur won a

competition sponsored by the French Academy of Sciences, aimed at proving or
disproving spontaneous generation with his elegantly e▯ective ask experiment.

Sadly, space constraints do not permit a detailed description of Pasteur’s many

other major achievements, which include his heat-killing treatment (\pasteurisa-






                                       2
                                                             INTRODUCTION



tion") and the development of several vaccines e▯ective against bacterial disease,

including chicken cholera.

    Pasteur and Koch remain the fathers of medical microbiology, with ideas
that continue to inuence and inform modern microbiology. At the turn of the

19th century, microbiologists, armed with microscopy, Koch’s postulates and pure

culture techniques entered the \▯rst golden age of microbiology" [8]. Perkins
remarked that \discovery of the principles... resulted in such a sudden burst

of investigation that it was a lost month in which a new organism was not de-

scribed, catalogued, and laid away". An astonishing urry of discoveries followed,

in which the causes of most signi▯cant bacterial diseases were determined within
a twenty-year period [8]. These discoveries included Theodor Escherich’s discov-

ery of Bacillus coli, now named Escherichia coli and Frankel’s discovery of the

pneumococcus, subsequently classi▯ed as Streptococcus pneumoniae.


Concepts
      Bacterial physiology

           Methods for cultivation and observation of bacteria
           Isolation of bacteria in pure culture
           Bacterial nutrition
           Bacterial classi▯cation based on phenotypes

      Medical microbiology
           Germ theory of disease
           Viruses

Applications
      Clinical identi▯cation of microbes
      Antimicrobial chemotherapy

      Vaccines
      Industrial fermentation

    Table 1.1: The ▯rst golden age of microbiology (adapted from Moloy [8])




1.1.1.4   Bacterial classi▯cation


Humans have a fundamental desire to classify things. Bacterial classi▯cation

rapidly became an obsession for the ▯rst generations of medical and environmental
microbiologists, aided by an ever-growing battery of tests and features, including

morphological characteristics, growth under di▯erent conditions and ability to






                                         3
                                                           INTRODUCTION



degrade particular substances (Table 1.2).

   In 1872, Ferdinand Cohn proposed a basic taxonomy of microbial life based on
morphological criteria, dividing microorganisms into four \tribes" and six genera

(Micrococcus, Bacterium, Bacillus, Vibrio, Spirillum and Spirochaeta) [9].
   In medical microbiology, discriminatory tests which could distinguish pathogenic

strains from harmless ones were highly valued, but this led to what would later

be seen as highly unnatural classi▯cations, often based on a single feature. Tests
such as Methyl Red were used to di▯erentiate members of the Enterobacteriaceae,

e.g. E. coli from Enterobacter. Urea hydrolysis was used to discriminate between
E. coli and Proteus in urinary tract infections. The most important test was

Gram’s staining method, which we now know divides organisms based on the

presence of peptidoglycan content in bacterial cell walls [10]. The Gram stain is
often used as the ▯rst stage of identi▯cation using dichotomous keys, a decision

ow-chart method which follows a series of Boolean (yes/no) choices leading to

a con▯dent identi▯cation at the last stage. These keys were, and still are, used
extensively in medical microbiology [11]. These early painstaking e▯orts on the

classi▯cation of bacteria culminated in the ▯rst edition of Bergey’s Manual [12],
published in 1923.



1.1.1.5   Numerical taxonomy

By the 1960s, the sheer number of observable phenotypes led Robert Sokal and
Peter Sneath to propose a system of what they called \numerical taxonomy" [13].

This system, based on methods pioneered by Michel Adanson in the early 19th

century, tabulated the results of tests, or \features", against bacterial isolates.
The method had several innovative elements. One was that each feature should be

considered with equal weight (with care taken not to introduce redundant tests).

Importantly, classi▯cation of isolates based on the feature table could be carried
out by computational methods, allowing the system to be used on large numbers

of specimens. Clustering algorithms, such as the neighbour-joining method were
applied to the data. By setting appropriate similarity cut-o▯s, this system gave

backwards compatibility with the existing taxonomy and provided a frame-work

for new biological insights. Sneath was prescient in predicting that features may






                                       4
                                                             INTRODUCTION



 Name                                      Method

 Microscopic morphology                    Cell shape, size, colour
 Macroscopic morphology                    Appearance of colonies
 Staining                                  Examples: Gram’s method, Acid-fast reac-

                                           tion
 Biochemical assay                         Catalase/oxidase, sugar fermentation
 Analytical Pro▯le Index (API)             Commercialised, miniaturised test panels.
                                           Phenotypic reactions case colour change. Re-
                                           sulting pattern looked up in reference book.
 Vitek-2 (bioMerieux)                      Plastic card with panel of biochemical tests

 Enzyme-linked    immunosorbent     assay  Solid-phase enzyme immunoassay
 (ELISA)


      Table 1.2: Tests for identi▯cation of bacteria in clinical microbiology


be sourced in the future from molecular data, stating \it may be possible in the

future to re-de▯ne it in terms of genes and perhaps nucleotides; this will not e▯ect

the basic concepts of Adansonian methods but may simplify them." [14]



1.1.2     The second golden age of microbiology

1.1.2.1   Genetics and evolution


Darwin corresponded with Cohn and knew of the work of Pasteur. However, his

theory of evolution had little impact on microbiological thinking for most of the
19th and 20th centuries. The idea that all life, including bacteria were descended

from a common ancestor gained little traction in a medically-dominated anthro-

pocentric viewpoint, in which bacterial species were regarded as ▯xed entities,

often with the sole purpose of causing disease of humans [15].
    In the mid-20th century, the \modern synthesis" of evolution and genetics

brought together ideas from Mendel and Darwin, resulting in a conceptual frame-

work for understanding and testing evolutionary theory in terms of genes. Theo-

dosius Dobzhansky placed Darwin’s ideas in the language of genetics, de▯ning
evolution as \a change in the frequency of an allele within a gene pool" and

later famously stating that \nothing in biology makes sense except in the light of

evolution" [16].









                                         5
                                                         INTRODUCTION



1.1.2.2   Molecular biology

Experimental microbiology had a key role in the birth of molecular biology. De-

oxyribonucleic acid (DNA) was isolated for the ▯rst time by Miescher in 1868
from surgical pus. The identi▯cation of DNA as the hereditary substance was

due to two key experiments. First, Gri▯th showed that the S. pneumoniae could

be transformed from a rough to a smooth phenotype by the addition of killed
cells of smooth phenotype [17]. After exhaustively purifying nucleic acid from

the killed cells, Avery subsequently showed it was only this molecule which could

cause transformation [18]. A failed attempt by the proli▯c Linus Pauling to deter-
mine the structure of DNA preceded Watson and Crick’s double helix structure,

which demonstrated elegantly the chemical basis of DNA replication [19].
   Following this discovery, many crucial secrets of life were uncovered: one was

Crick’s \central dogma"{\DNA makes RNA makes protein", with the ow of

genetic information in one direction. The genetic code was revealed to be a triple
nucleotide system and after much trial-and-error, Nirenberg and Gamow’s \RNA

tie club" assigned an amino acid or function to each of the possible 64 codons.

   The most visible product of the second golden age of microbiology was the de-
velopment of molecular cloning, harnessing bacterial gene expression and protein

synthesis to the needs of biotechnology. The discovery of restriction endonucle-
ases, able to cut DNA at speci▯c sequences, twinned with the ability to join

fragments with DNA ligase meant that recombinant DNA molecules could be

created within plasmid vectors and then transformed into E. coli [20{24].


1.1.2.3   Sequencing

Fred Sanger earned his ▯rst Nobel Prize in Chemistry for determining the amino

acid sequence of insulin. The ▯rst genome to be sequenced was from the RNA
virus bacteriophage MS2 in 1976 [25]. Soon afterwards, three methods of DNA

sequencing were invented in quick succession; Maxam and Gilbert’s method

[26], Sanger and Coulson’s \plus-minus" method [27] and the chain-termination
method now commonly referred to as \Sanger sequencing" [28]. Sanger sequenc-

ing employs a chain termination method using di-deoxynucleotide triphosphates
(ddNTPs), which prevent extension of nascent chains of DNA. By carrying out






                                      6
                                                            INTRODUCTION



Concepts

      Bacterial genetics
           DNA as genetic material and its structure
           Genetic code
           Mechanism of gene expression
           Regulation of gene expression

           Transposons
      Bacterial physiology
           Membrane transport and electrochemical gradients

      Cellular immunology


Applications
      Genetic engineering

      Nucleic acid and protein sequencing
      Microbial classi▯cation based upon genotypes
      Monoclonal antibodies


      Table 1.3: The second golden age of microbiology (adapted from [8])


four separate reactions, each with only one of the four ddNTPs added, and run-

ning the products on a polyacrylamide gel, the sequence of bases can be read.
Sanger’s method used radio-labelling for detection, but now tagging with a uo-

rescent dye is most commonly used. Plus-minus sequencing was used to sequence

the genome of the DNA phage ▯X174. However, the chain-termination method

soon proved the quickest and easiest of the three methods and permitted the
sequencing of several landmark genomes { the entire chromosome of human mi-

tochondrial DNA (16.6 kilobase pairs) and bacteriophage ▯ (49 kb).



1.1.2.4   Molecules as documents of evolutionary history

Comparisons between nucleotide or amino acid sequences of homologous molecules

(those sharing a common ancestor) remains the cornerstone of molecular phylo-

genetics, an approach which has breathed fresh life into Darwin’s idea of common
descent. Before DNA or even peptide sequences became readily available, Zuck-

erkandl and Pauling proposed that the information locked in these molecules

would enable the construction of molecular phylogenies, derived from compar-

isons of homologous sequences from di▯erent species [29]. They realised, given
that the genetic code was degenerate (more than one codons often coding for the






                                        7
                                                           INTRODUCTION



same amino acid), that \isosemantic changes" mean that nucleotide sequences

have a higher information content than protein sequences and thus proves a bet-
ter source of phylogenetic information. Furthermore, they speculated that it

might be possible to partition sequence changes into those that had undergone
selection and those that had not.

   The Luria and Delbru  ck experiment showed that mutations arose in the ab-

sence of selection, rather than as a response to selection [30]. Kimura subsequently
proposed that the majority of nucleotide changes were neutral, occurring through

genetic drift and that only a few were ▯xed by positive selection. This suggested
the existence of a \molecular clock" permitting measurement of evolutionary dis-

tances simply by counting the number of mutations seen between pairs of species.

Clustering algorithms from numerical taxonomy, such as neighbour-joining meth-
ods [31], permitted the phylogenetic reconstruction of evolutionary history in the

form of phylogenetic trees.

   Woese showed the ultimate power of these new methods by analysing se-
quences from the small ribosomal DNA subunit, universal in both bacteria and

eukaryotes. Woese made a remarkable discovery; by analysing ribonuclease diges-
tion patterns from 16S rDNA, he found that certain prokaryotes were actually as

closely related to eukaryotes as they were to bacteria. These outliers were often

\extremophiles", able to withstand extremes of heat, pH or salinity, suggesting
they may have been amongst the earliest forms of life. Woese therefore named

them the \archaebacteria" (now called \archaea") and proposed that they made

up one of three divisions, along with with bacteria and eukaryotes, in a universal
tree of life [32{34].

   Molecular studies have shown that the classical bacterial taxonomy is often
in conict with phylogenetic data. An example is the taxonomic classi▯cation of

E. coli and Shigella. In medical classi▯cations, shigellosis is always caused by the

Shiga-toxin producing Shigella and is distinct from enterohaemorrhagic disease
caused by E. coli O157:H7 (classical EHEC). Molecular phylogenetic analysis has

revealed that in fact Shigella is a member of the B2 phylogroup of E. coli [35,
36], making it more closely related to certain E. coli strains than some other E.

coli are from each other. Therefore, in terms of molecular taxonomy Shigella is

an E. coli (or E. coli are Shigellae). There are examples in other genera, such as





                                        8
                                                         INTRODUCTION



Streptococcus and Neisseria where such extensive recombination has occurred to
make species boundaries blurred or even meaningless.



1.1.3    Bacterial genomics

The publication of the complete genome sequence of Haemophilus inuenzae in

1995 ushered in the era of bacterial genomics [37]. The 1.83-megabase chromo-
some was sequenced at an estimated cost of $0.48 per ▯nished base-pair, giving

a total cost of around $900,000 [38].
   The process of whole-genome shotgun sequencing pioneered in this study be-

gan with the shearing of genomic DNA into short fragments. These fragments

were then cloned into plasmid vectors and expressed in E. coli to amplify them.
This \clone library" was grown on a solid medium, with individual colonies picked

for sequencing on capillary sequencing machines, which automate the Sanger se-
quencing method. This method proved highly successful and became the stan-

dard method for sequencing bacterial genomes and was later was used to sequence

larger genomes of model organisms: yeast, fruit y and Homo sapiens [39{41].
   By 2000, whole-genome sequencing had yielded complete, published sequences

for over two dozen biologically and medically important microbial species includ-
ing Helicobacter pylori, E. coli K-12, M. tuberculosis and Bacillus subtilis [42].

Technological and logistical innovations such as library construction using robots,

sequencing instruments with increased capacities and the scaling up of workows
in large sequencing centres, such as the Sanger Centre and the Institute for Ge-

nomic Research (TIGR), meant that, by 2005, at least one complete genome
sequence was available for most bacterial species or pathovars associated with

human disease. The availability of multiple strains of the same species led to

the ▯rst comparative genomics projects, which included a comparison between
two strains of H. pylori [43] and pair-wise whole-genome comparisons between

M. tuberculosis H37Rv, a commonly-used laboratory strain and the \Oshkosh"
outbreak strain CDC-1551 [44].

   An early \translational" (from the laboratory to the clinic) use of genome

sequencing was \reverse vaccinology": an approach to the discovery of vaccine
targets that relies on screening whole-genome sequences for potential protective






                                      9
                                                          INTRODUCTION



antigens which are then followed up experimentally [45, 46]. This approach has

recently culminated in the creation of an e▯ective vaccine against the meningo-
coccus [47].


1.1.3.1   Bacterial genome dynamics


If genes provide documents of evolutionary history, bacterial genome sequences
provide phylogenetic encyclopedias. When compared to related strains, genome

sequences often reect changes in lifestyle or adaptations to particular niches.
A notable ▯nding from comparative genomics studies are examples of extreme

genome reduction. For example, species of Buchnera, phylogenetically closely

related to E. coli, have genomes a fraction of its size [48, 49], having shed many
cellular functions on adopting the endosymbiotic lifestyle. Similarly Mycobac-

terium leprae diverged from the M. tuberculosis complex 36-66 million years ago

[50, 51]. Since then, it has lost over half of its protein-coding potential through
mutations which render genes non-functional, a process termed pseudogenisation,

accompanied by a reduction in genome size and a narrowing of its niche and host
range: M. leprae can only grow in humans, the nine-banded armadillo and the

mouse footpad [52, 53]. Recently, a new leprosy-causing species, M. lepromatosis

was discovered: phylogenetic analysis suggests these two species diverged approx-
imately 10 million years ago [54, 55].


1.1.3.2   Bacterial clonality


Molecular typing methods and genome sequencing have shed light on the popu-
lation genetics of bacterial species. Spratt used the results of multi-locus enzyme

electrophoresis to estimate the rate of change within the genome of a bacterial

species [56]. He recognised that clonality might be disrupted by the action of
recombination to re-organise the genome or replace segments of the genome from

one lineage with those from another. Spratt determined that certain species
are highly monomorphic, for example certain pathovars of Salmonellae, M. lep-

rae, Y. pestis and B. anthracis [57]. Phylogenetic analysis of such important

human pathogens is complicated by the lack of variation; sequencing much less
than the whole-genome will not provide su▯cient information for the purposes






                                       10
                                                        INTRODUCTION



Monomorphic
     Mycobacterium leprae
     Mycobacterium tuberculosis

     Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium
     Bacillus anthracis
     Yersinia pestis

Intermediate

     Acinetobacter baumannii
     Escherichia coli

Polymorphic

     Streptococcus spp.
     Neisseria spp.
     Haemophilus inuenzae


       Table 1.4: Genetically monomorphic and polymorphic pathogens


of typing and epidemiology. These strains are in contrast to strains with high

genomic plasticity, where signi▯cant gene loss and gain as well as chromosomal
rearrangements are seen as a result of recombination. Notable examples are in

the ▯-protobacteria such as Helicobacter and Campylobacter, Neisseriaceae and

Streptococcus (Table 1.4). The extent of recombination within ▯-protobacteria
is so extreme that inter-species comparisons often reveal a total breakdown of

genome synteny (co-linearity along the chromosome) [61, 62].


1.1.4    Clinical microbiology in the 21st century


1.1.4.1   The practice of clinical microbiology

Today, clinical microbiology remains ▯rmly rooted in 19th century techniques,
still relying on microscopy and culture to detect and identify potential pathogens.

Once obtained in pure culture, identi▯cation is made possible by a battery of

speci▯c phenotypic assays. Antibiotic sensitivity is assayed by assessing growth
in the presence of antimicrobial agents. While the process of performing multiple

biochemical tests is faciliated by commercially available semi-automated systems
such as Analytical Pro▯le Index (API) and Vitek-2, the principles of diagnostic






                                     11
                                                           INTRODUCTION



microbiology have changed little in over a century.


1.1.4.2   The threat of antibiotic resistance

      \It’s time to close the book on infectious diseases, declare the war

      against pestilence won, and shift national resources to such chronic

      problems as cancer and heart disease." { William H. Stewart, US
      Surgeon General


   The number dying from infectious diseases has fallen steadily during the 20th

century [63]. This is largely due to sanitation, vaccination programmes and antibi-
otic therapies, as well as improved nutrition [64]. However, the Surgeon General

was wrong to think that the war against infection would be nearly over in 1970.
Infection is still a leading cause of death world-wide, with an estimated one-third

of the world’s population infected by tuberculosis [65].

   For almost every class of clinically useful antibiotic, antibiotic-resistant strains
have been observed within a few years or at most decades after ▯rst clinical use

[66]. The emergence of antibiotic resistance in microbes poses a major threat to

our ability to treat infectious disease [67]. Numerous antibiotic-resistant \super-
bugs" have attracted attention, including meticillin-resistant Staphylococcus au-

reus (MRSA), vancomycin-resistant Enterococci and multidrug-resistant Pseu-
domonas aeruginosa. Space does not present a full description of these organisms.

Of particular concern is the emergence of multi-drug resistant Gram-negative bac-

teria including Acinetobacter baumannii, [68].
   Antibiotic resistance can arise via a number of molecular mechanisms: muta-

tions a▯ecting target sites of the drug (e.g. rpoB bypass mechanisms, mutations

conferring resistance to rifampicin in M. tuberculosis), antibiotic inactivating or
modi▯cation enzymes such as ▯-lactamases, changes in envelope permeability

and non-speci▯c systems such as drug e▯ux pumps. Antibiotic-resistant de-
terminants are commonly found in plasmids which may be transferred between

species, these include extended-spectrum ▯-lactamases (ESBLs) and Klebsiella

pneumoniae carbapenemases (KPCs). The recent discovery of a novel metallo-
▯-lactamase (NDM-1) which confers carbapenem resistance has been seen in as-

sociation with Klebsiella pneumoniae and E. coli infections [69]. This class is





                                       12
                                                          INTRODUCTION





of particular cause for concern as carbapenems are used as \last-resort" options
against ESBL-producing strains [70]. A \post-antibiotic apocalypse" looms with

some infections potentially becoming resistant to all known antibiotics. Pan-drug

resistant strains of A. baumannii and eXtremely-drug resistant (XDR) and totally
drug-resistant strains of M. tuberculosis have been isolated from patients [71{73].

It is also of concern that there are currently very few antibiotic candidates in the
commercial drug-discovery pipeline [74].



1.1.4.3   Bacterial epidemiology and bacterial typing

The aim of bacterial typing is to distinguish between strains within the same
species. Some typing schemes work with a number of species, whereas some

may be designed for a particular species or subspecies. An ideal bacterial typing

scheme would have a number of desirable properties, including speed, low-cost,
portability (comparable between laboratories [75]) and reproducibility. However,

in the real world, we ▯nd a plethora of less-than-ideal schemes. In fact, so many

typing schemes have since been proposed that Mark Achtman once proposed the
term \YATM"‘ (Yet Another Typing Method) as a light-hearted response to the

number of such schemes being published in the Journal of Clinical Microbiology
[76].

   Although often seen as an arcane adjunct to diagnostic microbiology, epi-

demiological typing can, if done quickly enough, have an impact on real-world
problems by revealing modes of spread of pathogens and informing choice of in-

tervention strategies (e.g. isolate and decontaminate infectious patients, more

thorough environmental cleaning, improved hand hygiene, better antibiotic stew-
ardship, removing of environmental source).

   Many of the molecular typing methods listed in Table 1.5 target sites in the
genome with a high mutation rate, for example microsatellite repeats (VNTR)

and repetitive regions (rep-PCR). This gives the advantage of ready discrimi-

nation between clones and they have been used with much success in bacterial
epidemiology. However many of these methods, however discriminatory, do not

provide information useful for phylogenetic reconstructions, making relatedness






                                       13
                                                               INTRODUCTION




 Name                         Region of genome considered Method employed
 Multilocus   enzyme   elec-  Whole genome                Gel electrophoresis

 trophoresis (MLEE) [77]
 Multilocus VNTR analysis     Microsatellite/tandem  re-  analysis of PCR fragment
 (MLVA) [78]                  peats                       size
 Multilocus sequence typing   Conserved     housekeeping  PCR and sequencing
 (MLST) [75]                  genes

 Pulse-▯eld gel electrophore- genome-wide restriction siterestriction digest and gel
 sis (PFGE) [79{81]                                       electrophoresis
 PCR/multiplex PCR [82]       Speci▯c genomic loci        PCR and optional sequenc-
                                                          ing

 rep-PCR [83]                 repetitive elements, outwardPCR and gel electrophoresis
                              facing primers


        Table 1.5: Examples of molecular techniques for bacterial typing


between isolates with di▯erent pro▯les hard to assess [84]. Techniques such as

MLEE and PFGE, which rely on images produced by gel electrophoresis, are not

easily portable between laboratories.

    Multilocus sequence typing (MLST) schemes rely on sequencing a number of

conserved \house-keeping" genes to generate a pro▯le. Each unique sequence is
given an allele number via an on-line database. Each unique combination of alleles

gives a \sequence-type\ (ST). An appropriate set of genes must be identi▯ed for

each species under consideration. The success of this scheme relies on choosing

genes that are found in all members of the species and evenly spaced around

the chromosome. Those wishing to share MLST data therefore must agree on

a suitable scheme and use the same set of primers. Multiple schemes may exist
for the same species, there are three competing primer sets for E. coli and two

for A. baumannii, creating potential for confusion [85{87]. MLST has proven a

highly versatile approach, with schemes available for over ▯fty taxa. It has been

particularly useful in understanding the population structure of recombinogenic

species such as H. inuenzae and the pathogenic Neisseria. However, MLST does
not work well for genetically monomorphic species such as M. tuberculosis, where

schemes such as MIRU-VNTR are more discriminatory [88, 89]. Additionally,

MLST schemes permit only a limited view of phylogenetic relatedness through

cluster analysis of single- or double-locus variants (pro▯les which di▯er by one or

two alleles and are assumed to be related).






                                          14
                                                         INTRODUCTION



1.1.5    High-throughput sequencing

The era of high-throughput sequencing began with the release of 454 Life Science’s

GS20 instrument in 2005. Its successor, the GS FLX, was able to produce 200
megabases of sequence each run, enough to sequence several isolates of E. coli

for around $10,000 in sequencing reagents. In 2008, this technology was used to
sequence James Watson’s genome, taking just two months [90, 91] at less than

1% of the cost of the original $3bn human genome project. The ▯rst-generation

Solexa Genetic Analyzer produced a gigabase of sequence data when it debuted
in late 2006 [92, 93]. Since then, sequencing throughput has exhibited a hyper-

Moore’s law increase in throughput, with a reciprocal reduction in costs. As of
writing the highest-throughput instrument, the Illumina HiSeq 2500 looks set to

be soon able to generate a terabase (1000 gigabases) of sequence data per run.

There is no sign of this progress slowing. Table 1.6 summarises currently available
high-throughput instruments.

   The ▯rst generation of high-throughput sequencing technologies di▯ered from
traditional Sanger sequencing in a number of important ways. Firstly, ampli▯-

cation of sample relied on the production of \molecular colonies" of clonal DNA

template, without the need for cloning into a biological vector and subsequent
expression in E. coli. These colonies are ampli▯ed on beads (454, Ion Torrent)

or on a solid-surface (Solexa) and are sequenced in a massively-parallel fashion,
between a million and a thousand million at a time, depending on the instrument.

The process of reading nucleotides may be light-based: laser-excitation of uo-

rescently labelled nucleotides (Solexa) or release of photons through the action
of luciferase during nucleotide incorporation (454). The Ion Torrent instrument

relies on the detection of protons released during nucleotide incorporation. This
takes place on a modi▯ed silicon chip functioning as a massively-parallel pH me-

ter. Space does not provide a fuller description of the technologies but Metzker

provides a comprehensive snapshot of the situation in 2009 [94].


1.1.5.1   Bioinformatics analysis of high-throughput sequencing data

Analysis of molecular sequence data relies on the process of alignment between

pairs of sequences. High-scoring alignments suggest the presence of homology and





                                      15
                                                                INTRODUCTION




 Technology               Year   Ampli▯cation method      Sequencing method        Ref

 454 (Roche)              2005   Emulsion PCR on beads    SBS (ow), uorescence  [90]
                                                          detection

 Solexa (Illumina)        2006   Bridge ampli▯cation on   SBS (reversible block-  [93]
                                 solid surface            ing)
 SOLiD (Life Technolo-    2008   Emulsion PCR on beads    Sequencing by oligonu-  [95]
 gies)                                                    cleotide ligation and de-

                                                          tection
 Helicos                  2009   Ampli▯cation-free        Single molecule uores- [96]
                                                          cent sequencing
 Paci▯c Biosciences       2010   Ampli▯cation-free        Monitoring of individ-  [97]

                                                          ual  DNA    polymerase
                                                          molecules in zero-mode
                                                          waveguide detectors
 Ion Torrent (Life Tech-  2011   Emulsion PCR on beads    SBS (ow), detection of [98]
                                                           +
 nologies)                                                H  ions on silicon chip


Table 1.6: High-throughput sequencing platforms and their year of introduction.
SBS: sequencing-by-synthesis.



permit calculation of sequence similarity to be made. The Smith-Waterman and

Needleman-Wunsch methods are well-established as \gold-standard" algorithms

for global and local alignments respectively [99, 100]. However, when faced with

the challenge of aligning millions of reads produced by high-throughput sequenc-
ing instruments to a reference genome, these algorithms were found to be too

computationally expensive to be of practical use [101]. New aligners, optimised

for high-throughput sequencing experiments have been designed for large num-

bers of short reads.

    One of the ▯rst short-read aligners was Heng Li’s MAQ [102] which was ex-

tremely fast, but had drawbacks, particularly an inability to align individual reads

across insertions or deletions (\indels"). The BWA and Bowtie short-read align-

ers subsequently gained popularity due to their speed, thanks to an optimised
indexing technique called the Burrows-Wheeler transform [103]. Many of the

original algorithms traded sensitivity for speed, to the extent where alignments

were often unreliable. Improvements such as BWA-SW, SSAHA2 and Novoalign

incorporated a fast \seed" step coupled with the slower, more accurate Smith-

Waterman or Needleman-Wunsch algorithms to generate more reliable output

[104, 105]. There is now such a variety of short-read aligners that, echoing Acht-







                                          16
                                                         INTRODUCTION



man’s YATM, a recently published alignment program was named YOABS (Yet

Other Aligner of Biological Sequences) [106]!
   Short-read aligners are deployed in re-sequencing projects, where a high-

quality reference sequence serves as template. When no reference is available,
or when an unbiased method is needed, genome assembly software can be used

to attempt to reconstruct genome sequences de novo. Initially, de novo assem-

bly with reads as short as 20-30 bases was thought to be impossible, as existing
methods, such as the overlap-layout-consensus algorithm, which worked with long

capillary reads and also with 454 sequencing data, did not work for short-read se-
quencing data. However, development of new assembly methods permitted useful

assemblies to be generated from these data, albeit with large numbers of sequence

\gaps", where repetitive sequences were encountered [107]. The most successful
de novo assembly software now work by constructing de Bruijn graphs of over-

lapping k-mers (short sequence words). Examples of commonly used software

packages include Velvet, SOAPdenovo and ABYSS [108{110].
   Once whole-genome assemblies have been generated, \downstream" analysis

often involves annotation of sequences. Typically this involves an initial stage,
where coding sequences are predicted (using software such as Glimmer or GEN-

EMARK, or through homology searches using BLAST [111{113]) and detection

of stable RNA species (tRNAScan-SE, RNAmmer [114, 115]). Subsequently cod-
ing sequences are assigned a tentative function through homology searches of

existing annotation databases, such as the National Center for Biotechnology In-

formation’s non-redundant protein database [116]. This process can be performed
by automated annotation pipelines such as this author’s xBASE-NG [117].

   Once annotated, whole-genome assemblies can be viewed through software
such as Artemis, or compared to another genome using Artemis Comparison Tool.

Multiple whole-genome aligners can build an alignment from many genomes.

These alignments can then be used to build whole-genome phylogenies, or to
analyse the core and pan-genome of a species.

   The choice of whether to analyse data through a re-sequencing approach or
de novo depends on a number of factors listed in Table 1.7.









                                      17
                                                       INTRODUCTION



Resequencing approach
     Closely-related reference genome available

     Detection of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) Detection of small
     indels
     Detection of sequence absent from the newly-sequenced strain



de novo assembly approach
     No reference sequence or divergent reference sequence
     Detection of novel genes or sequence in the newly-sequenced strain

     Detection of large-scale genomic rearrangements



         Table 1.7: Factors determining choice of sequencing analysis



1.1.5.2  Genomic epidemiology

Whole-genome sequencing has been rapidly adopted as a research tool for molec-
ular evolution studies (Table 1.8).

































                                    18
                            ]     ]       ]
                            2     4       6
e   8          9    0       1     1       1    7    8          9             0    8
R   1          1    1       1     3       5    1    1          1             1    1
    [          [    [       1     1       1    [    [          [             [    [
                            [     [       [                                                                                          1
         -          -             s f                                s       -
    i  l e     t    n  n    i     a o     e    i    a  e  a    h  h  n h     e    i
    t  A i     i    m  a    a     w e     t    w    f at  i    t  t  t t     e    r
    o  . d     t    e  n    u     r a     n    o    o  i  d    i  t  g i     i    d
    e  e m     n    d  i    p     l w     i    t    i  a  u    n  e  t e     c    t
       d f     a    n  a    p     h e          n    r  n  f    s  u  e y     v    e
    t  e s     t    n  i    x     c r     a o  i    o  c  e    e  D  i o     f    v
    r  d t     g    g  m    p     e t     a i  d    h     o    o  .    p     s    e
    s  r o     i    o  n    m     g ;     a n  v    t in  t    s  e  s o     c    i         g
    o  o i     a    t  a    c     u s     C r  o    c  n  o    x  c  e m     n    s         l
    m  f o     l    p  u    a     s o     , F  n    r  a  t    r  a  o l     s s  m         i
    d  e n     t    s  h    l     i s     r n  e    t  t  e  d t  s  f n     i a  n         m
       o i     e    r yl    e     e r     t S  e    e  f la n  a  r  n l     e t  r a.      e
    i  e a     e    e  a    e     i d     n i w   g l  o  r  g k  t  g c     ▯ s  t  d      i
    c  y i     e    f  e    r     e a     O s  n ni h  S  y  n i  e  h y     d 9  v  n      e
    l  t i     a    o  t    i     t y     i o  a  o s  G  e  E d  m  a n     t 1  t  a      e
    c  c c     a    r  w    r     a n       t  t  i s  W  l  e e  e  p u     r p  t  C      m
       e i  l  e    t  s    s     H g  c  i f  t op a  .  c  N e  v  i e     s t  p  i      o
    a  q d  i  s    n  P    a     e e  m  m i  n  d n  n  l  n h  g  t f     o r  f  s      e
    t  s e  s  l    i  S    d     t m  e  d e ti  o a  n  a  y o  a  f w     m s  s  l      -
    s  t a  o  t    h  f    t       e  n  p s  d  s e  s  t  o t  o  o l     d n  s  c      l
    a  a g  i  u    o  o    o     o h ap  e v  e  s o  o  n  c g  t  r o     g i  l  e      o
    r  s e  h  m    m  o    c     f t  h  e i  r  r e  -  g  f s  m  t e     i i  n  u      h
    t  s ▯  T  d    o  t    e     e n  n  h f  t  t -  o  l  g v  t  n n     n a  a  t      l
    i  - d  a  ▯    o  c .  r     a r  v  t r  d  l o  f  h  s i  y  c s     u i  e  o      i
    h  u t of  t    m os  e v     o d  s  d t  t  f h  f  p  e x  s  h r     e b  a  k      e
    a  d r  s  e e  e sa  u d  e  i d  i  t u  t  o w  o  r  o r  a  r p     s o  -  e      t
    o  s s dr  i n  m  d  r o  u  o t a   i c  n  a i  a  e  p t  s  o o  e  e e  r  b      a
e   S  h o  w  S t  ▯  t  e S  c  S o re  s a  o  r n  r  w  t e  p  o d  p  o r  o  u      b
o   G  t m  t  G s  o  r  a G  r  G p  o  v o me  t r t   o  e m S   o l  m  e p  e  o      i
N   W  o d en  W r C s t Ws Wi t    m  c I c D o Fu o  o f m   A U m r s G c   a  N an      s
                                                                                            i
                                                    o                                       d
                                                    i                                       t
                                                    v                                       s
                                                    t                                       l
                                                    o                                       a
                                                    M                                       o
               )                                    a                                       N
               -                                    o                                       :
               N                                    e                                       .
               E                                    s                                       1
    )          M                                    c                                       l
    3          (                               e    r                                       b
    2          e                               e    n                        e    i         a
    S          i                               o    e          s             i    l         T
    (          o            l     a       e    y    l          c             o    u
s   u          m    a       c     l       e    o    e          r             m    e
n   r          e    p       i     o       o    o    o          n             e    u
g   a          p    l       d     c       p    m    l          a             p    t
r   .          .    .       .     .       .    .    a          .             .    .
O   S          S    M       C     V       S    L    S          B             S    M
                                                                                  y
    d                                     i                                       i
    i                                     w                                       u
    l                                     o                                       m
a   o                                     t                                       m
S   W                                     N                                       C
                                                      PRESENT WORK



   The use of sequencing in genomic epidemiology was pioneered on viruses.

One high-pro▯le example of using phylogenetic recontructions in tracing human-
to-human spread of a pathogen was an investigation of patients who contracted

HIV without obvious risk factors. Epidemiological analysis revealed they had
the same dentist. The dentist, who was infected by HIV was implicated as the

likely source. Sequencing of gp120 and phylogenetic analysis suggested that the
virus from the dentist were closely related to the viruses of infected patients [131].

In bacteria, whole-genome sequencing was used to great e▯ect to show that the
culture of Bacillus anthracis, sent in the US mail to prominent senators and

journalists, belonged to a common laboratory strain, the Ames strain. Whole-

genome sequencing, rather than conventional molecular typing was required in
this case due to the highly genetically monomorphic nature of this pathogen [129].



1.2     Present work


1.2.1    Aim of the studies

I present ▯ve studies, which explore the potential of high-throughput sequencing

in clinical microbiology. These studies spring from several vantage points:

   ▯ from an infection control standpoint, looking at transmission chains in a
     hospital outbreak.


   ▯ from the viewpoint of a clinical microbiologist, looking at the impact of
     antimicrobial therapy on bacteria in a single patient.


   ▯ from a pubic health perspective, looking at a colonisation and infection
     within a local human population.


   ▯ from an international perspective during a sudden, serious, large outbreak.

   ▯ from the perspective of microbiology laboratory sta▯ faced with a choice of

     novel technologies and instruments.








                                    20
                                                        PRESENT WORK



1.2.1.1   High-throughput whole-genome sequencing to dissect the epi-

          demiology of Acinetobacter baumannii isolates from a hospi-
          tal outbreak

In this study, we investigated a 2008 outbreak of A. baumannii in Selly Oak

Hospital in Birmingham. All outbreak isolates processed by the clinical microbi-

ology laboratory had been determined to be clonal through conventional typing
techniques. The outbreak was signi▯cant because there was a suspicion of trans-

mission from military to civilian patients. Military patients had previously been

found to be frequently colonised or infected with A. baumannii [132]. We explored
in general terms whether whole-genome sequencing could aid our understanding

of the outbreak. The series of speci▯c overlapping questions were addressed in
this study:


   1. Can whole-genome sequencing be used for bacterial typing?

   2. Is there variation between isolates within a small outbreak and can this

      variation be detected reliably?

   3. Can the high resolution o▯ered by whole-genome sequencing be used for

      ▯ne-grained epidemiological typing within short timescales (days, weeks or

      months).

   4. Can such information be used to resolve alternative infection control hy-

      potheses, for example by shedding light on chains of transmission?

   5. What are the limitations of this method?


1.2.1.2   Whole-genome comparison of two Acinetobacter baumannii

          isolates from a single patient, where resistance developed dur-
          ing tigecycline therapy


Following an abdominal procedure, a patient was found to have A. baumannii
in surgical drain uid, resistant to most antibiotics. Following a course of tige-

cycline chemotherapy A. baumannii was isolated a second time, now resistant

to tigecycline but with increased susceptibility to other antibiotics. The speci▯c
questions asked in this study are:





                                      21
                                                        PRESENT WORK



   1. How do strains evolve during infection of a single patient and during an-

     tibiotic treatment?

   2. Can whole-genome sequencing provide testable hypotheses as to mecha-

     nisms of antibiotic resistance in a case of treatment failure?


1.2.1.3   Open-Source Genomic Analysis of Shiga-Toxin Producing E.
          coli O104:H4


During the spring and summer of 2011, a large outbreak of E. coli food poi-
soning occurred in Germany, causing >4000 infections and ▯40 deaths. Work-

ing prospectively, we combined whole-genome sequencing of the strain and dis-

tributed \crowd-sourced" analysis to understand the evolutionary origins and
pathogen biology of this strain.


   1. What is the evolutionary origin of the German E. coli O104:H4 outbreak

     strain?

   2. How does this strain di▯er from classical enterohaemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC)?


   3. What genetic factors might be responsible for the high levels of mortality
     in this outbreak?


   4. How can whole-genome sequencing be used prospectively during an inter-
     national outbreak?


   5. What advantages does the open-endedness of genome sequencing o▯er?

     Limtations of this approach?

   6. Crowd-sourcing and prospects for future outbreaks


1.2.1.4   Performance comparison of benchtop high-throughput sequenc-

          ing platforms

In the previous study, the ability to sequence genomes during an outbreak was

made possible by new technologies; Ion Torrent PGM, 454 GS Junior and Illu-
mina MiSeq, all examples of low-cost benchtop sequencers. These instruments






                                     22
                                        RESULTS AND DISCUSSION



are characterised by a much shorter running time and lower cost than the previ-

ous generation of high-throughput sequencers. We wished to determine whether
these instruments were ▯t-for-purpose for use in future outbreaks and if there

were remaining challenges needed to be addressed before high-throughput se-

quencing could become a routine assay in microbiology. Our speci▯c aims were
to determine:


   1. How do the current benchtop sequencing platforms compare for the purpose
     of epidemiology and evolution studies in bacteria?


   2. What are the limitations in analysing draft genome sequence data?

   3. What are the practical limitations of current whole-genome sequencing plat-

     forms for genomic epidemiology and evolution?



1.3     Results and discussion


1.3.1    Paper I

1.3.1.1  Can whole-genome sequencing be used for bacterial typing?
         Is there variation between isolates within a small outbreak

         and can this variation be detected reliably?     Can the high

         resolution o▯ered by whole-genome sequencing be used for
         ▯ne-grained epidemiological typing within short timescales?

         (days, weeks or months)

In this study we demonstrate that whole-genome sequencing of isolates, indis-
tinguishable by routine typing methods such as VNTR and PFGE, can both

recapitulate existing typing methods, and detect additional variation as SNPs.

Phylogenetic comparisons with other sequenced strains showed that i) the out-
break strains were very closely related and sometimes there was no detectable

variation between them, ii) belonged to the European Clone I lineage and iii) had
many thousands of SNPs which distinguished them from other, unrelated strains.

   The degree of variation we saw was low, with di▯erences between outbreak
strains found at only three loci.





                                   23
                                            RESULTS AND DISCUSSION



   A notable feature of our approach is the use of de novo assembly of a pooled

outbreak strain, followed by mapping alignments of each isolate against the as-
sembly. This contrasts to the approach used in most other genomic epidemiology

studies which utilise a re-sequencing approach. This was not appropriate in our
case because there was no closely-related reference strain available. It was no-

table that this approach generated a large number of likely false positive SNP

and indel calls, as evidenced by the inspection of the mapping alignment, particu-
larly associated with homopolymeric tracts, contig ends and repetitive regions. A

highly stringent SNP ▯ltering technique, adapted from Holt et al [133], was used
in order to reduce false positives. This stringent ▯ltering resulted in a Sanger se-

quencing validation rate of 100%. This gives con▯dence that the 454 sequencing

method used, in conjunction with strict SNP ▯ltering, is resilient enough to be
used without additional validation methods in future studies.


1.3.1.2   Can such information be used to resolve alternative infection

          control hypotheses, for example by shedding light on chains

          of transmission?

The intention was that, should su▯cient phylogenetic signal be detected, a tree

could be constructed from the available SNPs. The preference is to use synony-
mous nucleotide substitutions in coding regions, which are more likely to serve

as neutral markers of evolution to do this.
   However, in this study we detected only three SNPs and only one was syn-

onymous. In such circumstances, reconstructing an accurate phylogenetic tree,

excluding homoplasy and recombination, is not possible. Therefore, the three
variants were used as a simple genotype (similar to those used in multiplexed

PCR typing systems, for example). In this case we need to make the simplifying

assumption that no homoplasy was present, and that each locus, once mutated
from the ancestral state (inferred by homology to an outlier strain) was unlikely

to revert back to this state.
   Making these simplifying assumptions, the genotypes were useful in making

the case for particular chains of transmission being more parsimonious than oth-

ers. However, the evidence shown is circumstantial and can only be interpreted






                                       24
                                            RESULTS AND DISCUSSION



in the context of strong epidemiological information.


1.3.1.3   What are the limitations of this method?

Genome sequencing of bacterial isolates usually depends on culture to generate

su▯cient DNA template, typically between 500 nanograms and 10 micrograms

depending on the instrument used. This additional culture step is potentially
an issue for genomic epidemiology studies that rely on detecting such a small

amount of variation. There are several potential problems. Firstly, sub-culture
in the laboratory may result in mutations, either neutral or selected for by growth

on a selective medium, which were not present in the original patient’s infection.

Secondly, not all bacterial cells in the pathogen population [in vivo] need be
identical. The patient may have a mixed infection, with two or more quite distinct

strain lineages at one or more sites; and even in a clonal population not all

genotypes need be the same, as shown by the Amerithrax investigation [129]
   One answer to this problem is to pick multiple colonies from a plate and se-

quence each one separately. However, this will be expensive and may still miss
genotypes occurring at low frequency, as seen in the Amerithrax cultures. A

better solution may be to employ culture-independent methods such as whole-

genome shotgun metagenomics [134]. These methods permit sequencing in an
unbiased manner of all DNA present in a sample. These approaches currently

su▯er from signi▯cant complexity in terms of data analysis and in clinical samples,
where human DNA outnumbers microbial DNA signi▯cantly, the costs of these

approaches are currently too high. Additionally, many samples will not have suf-

▯cient volume of high-quality DNA required for sequencing. These samples could
be subjected to molecular ampli▯cation technique such as multiple displacement

ampli▯cation (MDA) using random hexamer primers [135, 136]. However, these

may introduce signi▯cant artefacts, including very uneven sequence coverage and
the generation of chimeric (hybrid) sequences, which can hamper analysis [137{

139].











                                       25
                                           RESULTS AND DISCUSSION



1.3.2    Paper II

1.3.2.1   How do strains evolve during infection of a single patient and

          during antibiotic treatment?

In this second study, two isolates were retrieved from the same patient, one be-
fore and one after tigecycline therapy. Intriguingly, despite being conducted over

similar time-scales as the ▯rst study, many more sequence variants were discov-

ered, in the form of SNPs and large-scale genomic deletions. In this case, the
numbers of SNPs far exceeded either the predicted nucleotide substitution rate

for this genus, or the rate seen in our epidemiological study [140]. The likely
explanation is the observation that the gene for an important DNA-repair en-

zyme was disrupted in the second isolate. This gene, mutS encodes one half of

the two-component system, mutRS and is commonly associated with a hyper-
mutator phenotype in many species, including Acinetobacter bayli. This report

is the ▯rst to suggest that a hypermutator phenotype might be associated with
clinical infection in Acinetobacter baumannii; this phenotype has subsequently

been con▯rmed experimentally (Hornsey, personal communication).

   Disruption of the mutRS system is associated with an increased mutation fre-
quency, particularly of transitions (A,G, C,T). In the A. bayli ADP1 strain,

disruption of mutS resulted in an estimated 54-fold increase in mutation rates
[140]. Taken together, these results have important medical implications. A.

baumannii is intrinsically multi-drug resistant and both extremely-drug resistant

and pan-drug resistant strains have been seen. According to Martn ▯ez, hyper-
mutable bacteria \are signi▯cantly more likely to acquire an antibiotic resistance

phenotype when compared to bacteria with lower mutation rates." [141].


1.3.2.2   Can whole-genome sequencing provide testable hypotheses as

          to mechanisms of antibiotic resistance in a case of treatment
          failure?

Tigecycline resistance is associated with mutations in adeS, which encodes a his-

tidine kinase sensor involved in the regulation of the drug e▯ux system adeABC

[142] and a mutation in this gene was the likely cause of the drug-resistant pheno-
type. Interestingly, I found several regions of di▯erence between the isolates, with





                                      26
                                           RESULTS AND DISCUSSION



the tigecycline-resistant isolate losing several coding regions associated with an-
tibiotic resistance, including several aminoglycoside-resistance determinants and

genes encoding a beta-lactamase gene and a 16S rRNA methylase. An attrac-

tive explanation is that the disruption of mutS accelerated the loss of these
antibiotic-resistance determinants. Whether these mutations have an e▯ect on

▯tness [in vivo] or [in vitro] remains a subject for future experiments.


1.3.3    Paper III

1.3.3.1   What is the evolutionary origin of the German E. coli O104:H4

          outbreak strain?

E. coli food-poisoning resulting in bloody diarrhoea and haemolytic-uraemic-

syndrome is usually a result of infection by Shiga-toxin-producing strains of

so-called enterohaemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC), most commonly belonging to the
O157:H7 serotype. This outbreak was caused by a serotype only rarely associ-

ated with disease, O104:H4. The outbreak strain was assigned by MLST (real
and virtual, based on the whole-genome sequence) to sequence type ST678. This

sequence type had only one entry in the online MLST database: strain 01-09591,

which had been isolated in 2001, also in Germany. However, it had been seen sev-
eral times before, but none of the previous examples had been subjected to MLST.

Notably, the sequence of E. coli 55989 had been deposited in Genbank, but was
recognised as an ST678 isolate only through phylogenetic and comparative analy-

sis of whole genomes. This strain had been isolated from an HIV-infected patient

with diarrhoea in Africa in 2002.
   The German outbreak strain and the two other ST678 strains belong to phy-

logroup B1, a lineage associated with the entero-aggregative pathovar (EAEC)
rather than with EHEC. This was a surprising ▯nding. Its unusual provenance

initially hampered microbiological diagnosis, which relies on detection of sorbitol

non-fermenters (a phenotype associated with the O157:H7 lineage).











                                      27
                                           RESULTS AND DISCUSSION



1.3.3.2   How does this strain di▯er from classical enterohaemorrhagic

          E. coli (EHEC)? What genetic factors might be responsible
          for the high levels of mortality in this outbreak?

The O104:H4 outbreak strain has a phage-encoded Shiga-like toxin 2 similar

to that found in EHEC strains [143], which accounts for the haemorrhagic di-

arrhoea and haemolytic-uraemic syndrome. However, there are distinct di▯er-
ences in predicted virulence gene repertoires between the outbreak strain and

O157:H7 strains. The outbreak strain lacks the locus of enterocyte e▯acement

(LEE), which codes for important virulence determinants including intimin and
a type-III secretion system thought to play a key role in attachment to the lu-

men of the gut and responsible for secreting e▯ector proteins into the cytosol of
enterocytes [144]. However, the outbreak strain, consistent with other entero-

aggregative strains, exploits alternative adhesins, including the plasmid-encoded

AAF/I system. The plasmids also encode for a number of antibiotic resistance
genes including bla(CTX-M-15).

   The conict between traditional medical classi▯cation and molecular phy-

logeny was signi▯cant when categorising this strain. For example, strains may be
classi▯ed as Shiga-toxin producing E. coli (STEC) but this designation is more

commonly reserved for EHEC-like strains. However, certainly this strain was
STEC. However, the molecular data indicate it belongs to an entero-aggregative

lineage and thus should be called an EAEC.

   This raises an important issue{if whole-genome data is to be used as the
ultimate typing system{can genomic data alone satisfy both the needs of clin-

ical microbiologists to classify isolates for the purpose of diagnosis, and those
of molecular epidemiologists who wish to understand evolutionary history. Cur-

rently, there is no simple answer to this question.


1.3.3.3   How can whole-genome sequencing be used prospectively dur-

          ing an international outbreak?

As with MLST, whole-genome sequencing data is digital and thus easily portable.

The genome sequence of the E. coli outbreak strain was generated during the
outbreak and released into the public domain, kick-starting a process of public






                                      28
                                            RESULTS AND DISCUSSION



\crowd-sourced" analysis. This analysis led to an understanding of many impor-

tant characteristics of this strain, with much analysis completed in a manner of
weeks, as documented on the Github repository. A criticism of this approach is

that analysis would su▯er from low-quality inputs from enthusiastic amateurs.
However, this was not the case, and most ▯ndings online are consistent with the

eventual published literature.

   However, genome analysis was con▯ned to a handful of strains during this
outbreak. Therefore there was not the opportunity to perform more extensive ge-

nomic epidemiology during the outbreak which may have mapped to transmission
chains. In a future outbreak, public health laboratories with genome sequencing

capacity may be able to deposit sequences for isolates as they are collected. This

in turn would permit high-resolution phylogenies to be built \on-the-y".


1.3.3.4   Crowd-sourcing and prospects for future outbreaks

Crowd-sourcing solutions to scienti▯c problems has been made possible on a vast

scale over the past 15 years enabled by the vast growth in internet-connected per-
sonal computers. A number of crowd-sourcing projects have had success through

appealing to a critical mass of users (Table 1.3.3.4).

   During the E. coli outbreak, crowd-sourcing of the genome was encouraged by
timely release of genome data, from BGI and the Health Protection Agency [147]

and the explicit use of licensing to allow free use of the datasets. Subsequent
analysis was enabled by freely-available communications tools including blogs,

Wikis, Twitter, discussion forums and source code repositories such as Github

[148{150]. This was the ▯rst example of crowd-sourced analysis for bacterial
genomic epidemiology, although such approaches have been used in virology, most

notably during outbreaks of inuenza.
















                                       29
                                       RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
















Name            Type                         Aim

SETI @ HOME     Distributed computing        Harness distributed comput-
                                             ing power to search for extra-

                                             terrestrial life through signal
                                             processing of radio transmis-
                                             sions. Two million years to-

                                             tal computing time logged.
Phylo [145]     Gaming                       A \citizen science" project
                                             for improving multiple se-
                                             quence alignments

FOLDIT          Gaming                       Package the process of man-
                                             ual protein structure predic-
                                             tion as an addictive game.

                                             This project resulted in an
                                             improved crystal structure
                                             of the Mason-P▯zer monkey

                                             virus retroviral protease pro-
                                             tein [146]


          Table 1.9: Examples of popular crowd-sourcing projects


















                                  30
                                         RESULTS AND DISCUSSION



1.3.4    Paper IV

1.3.4.1  How do the current benchtop sequencing platforms compare

         for the purpose of epidemiology and evolution studies in bac-
         teria?

Benchtop sequencers may speed adoption of whole-genome sequencing for clinical

microbiology due to their low-cost and fast running times. The three instruments

currently available on the market were all used to generate valuable data during
the German E. coli outbreak. However, it is far from clear whether they per-

form equally, and whether enthusiastic adoption in public health laboratories is
warranted, or whether issues remain which need to be addressed. In the study,

comparisons were made between price, read length, throughput, quality and ease

of use. Each instruments had strengths and weaknesses, and it was not possible
to call a stand-out winner.


1.3.4.2  What are the technical obstacles in analysing draft genome

         sequence data?

1.3.4.3  What are the practical limitations of current whole-genome

         sequencing platforms for genomic epidemiology and evolu-
         tion?


The ▯nal study emphasises that whole-genome data is not created equally be-
tween sequencing platforms. The main di▯erences between platforms result from

variations in read length (from 100 bp to over 500 bp), and in error rates. The

454 GS Junior and Ion Torrent PGM generate systematic errors which hamper
the ability to analyse sequence data. These errors a▯ect assembled sequences

of genes important for virulence, and genes used for MLST through the intro-
duction of frame-shift mutations. Additionally, short read lengths increase the

degree of fragmentation in de novo assemblies, with consequent ambiguity when

performing certain analyses: for example, it may di▯cult to determine whether
sequences originate from plasmids or the chromosome.









                                    31
                                         CONCLUDING STATEMENTS



1.4     Concluding statements

Taken together, these four studies demonstrate the promise of high-throughput

sequencing in clinical microbiology and public health. Whole-genome sequencing
can both recapitulate existing bacterial typing methods as well as laying claim

to being the ultimate bacterial typing method; universal, digital, portable and
potentially able to discriminate strains which di▯er by as little as one SNP. Whole-

genome sequencing can also give insights into pathogen biology and reveal the

underlying mutational processes responsible for the development of antibiotic
resistance and immune system evasion.

   There is still need to make progress in presenting this wealth of information
to the needs of clinicians who currently want to know simply \What is it?" and

\How can I treat it?". It may be that clinicians do not ask the best questions,

particularly considering the inexorable march of developing antibiotic resistance.
Management decisions in infectious disease may be better when clinicians frame

their questions from an evolutionary perspective{\Where did it come from?" and
\How could it change?", as well as \What else does it live with?". The bacterial

species concept, already nebulous, could be discarded and classi▯cation could be
based on genome data alone.

   I believe that the availability of low-cost benchtop sequencing instruments

will trigger a shift towards adoption of whole-genome sequencing in clinical mi-
crobiology over the next few years. Use by early adopters may be for the pur-

pose of replacing existing bacterial typing techniques such as MLST, PFGE and
VNTR. Sequencing demonstrably o▯ers higher resolution as well as backwards-

compatibility so this should be an \easy sell". Complete adoption of this tech-
nology by all clinical microbiologists is still by no means certain. In the NHS,

cost will be a major limiting factor until a bacterial genome can be obtained for

a price at least as cheap as existing methods. Other possible constraints to the
adoption of whole-genome sequencing are listed in Table 1.10.

   Looking further to the future, there is great promise in using these tech-
niques for diagnosis of infectious disease. This is likely to rely on metagenomic

approaches. Metagenomics are currently limited to research applications due
to technical complexities. However this ▯eld is likely on the cusp of becom-






                                      32
                                        CONCLUDING STATEMENTS












Microbiological
     Reliance on pure culture (particularly important for slow-growing organ-

     isms)

Sequencing
     High input requirements (>500 nanograms DNA)

     Complex laboratory work-ows

Analytical
     Di▯culties due to short read lengths, errors
     Data storage

     Internet bandwidth
     Availability of robust analysis pipelines
     Lack of specialist bioinformatics skills


Professional
     Inertia
     Resistance to change
     Proof of non-inferiority


Social
     Regulatory approval (particularly in US)
     Data sharing and privacy policies, particularly with metagenomics

Commercial

     Competing \closed-source" methods


      Table 1.10: Impediments to take up of high-throughput sequencing














                                     33
                                         CONCLUDING STATEMENTS



ing genuinely \translatable". It may be that emerging sequencing technologies,

such as those based on nanopore technologies, may allow for direct detection of
microbial DNA without any sample preparation [151]. This new ▯eld, clinical

metagenomics, is the area I wish to explore next, with funding obtained from the
Medical Research Council.

   Ultimately we may shift from Koch’s original model of one bacterial species

causing one disease, to a more complete understanding of how the interactions
between microbial communities (the \metagenome") modulate states of health

and disease. We may be able to model the complex biological interactions of
infection, involving host and microbial community, including but not limited to

the headline \pathogen" [152]. Such an \eco-evo" view of microbial community

dynamics may suggest strategies for treating and preventing infection.







































                                     34
Bibliography




  1.  Robertson, M. Biology in the 1980s, plus or minus a decade. Nature 285,
      358{9 (1980).

  2.  Porter, J. Antony van Leeuwenhoek: tercentenary of his discovery of bac-

      teria. Bacteriol Rev 40, 260{9 (1976).

  3.  Guerrero, R. & Berlanga, M. The hidden side of the prokaryotic cell: re-

      discovering the microbial world. Int Microbiol 10, 157{68 (2007).

  4.  Wainwright, M. An alternative view of the early history of microbiology.
      Adv Appl Microbiol 52, 333{55 (2003).

  5.  Newsom, S. Pioneers in infection control: John Snow, Henry Whitehead,

      the Broad Street pump, and the beginnings of geographical epidemiology.
      J Hosp Infect 64, 210{6 (2006).

  6.  Bentivoglio, M. & Pacini, P. Filippo Pacini: a determined observer. Brain

      Res Bull 38, 161{5 (1995).

  7.  Ellis, H. Gerhard Hansen: discoverer of the organism of leprosy. Br J Hosp
      Med (Lond) 73, 113 (2012).

  8.  Maloy, S. & Schaechter, M. The era of microbiology: a golden phoenix. Int

      Microbiol 9, 1{7 (2006).

  9.  Oren, A. & Thane Papke, R. Molecular Phylogeny of Microorganisms (Cais-
      ter Academic Press, 2010).

 10.  Brock, T. D. Milestones in Microbiology 1546-1940 (Milestones in Micro-

      biology, 1999).







                                       35
                                                          BIBLIOGRAPHY



11.  Noguerola, I. & Blanch, A. Identi▯cation of Vibrio spp. with a set of di-

     chotomous keys. J Appl Microbiol 105, 175{85 (2008).

12.  Bergey, D. Bergey’s Manual of Determinative Bacteriology (Wiliams and
     Wilkins, 1923).

13.  Sneath, P. & Sokal, R. Numerical taxonomy. Nature 193, 855{60 (1962).

14.  Sneath, p. The application of computers to taxonomy. J Gen Microbiol 17,

     201{26 (1957).

15.  O’Malley, M. What did Darwin say about microbes, and how did microbi-

     ology respond? Trends Microbiol 17, 341{7 (2009).

16.  Dobzhansky, T. Biology, Molecular and Organismic. Am Zool 4, 443{52
     (1964).

17.  Gri▯th, F. The Signi▯cance of Pneumococcal Types. J Hyg (Lond) 27,

     113{59 (1928).

18.  Avery, O., Macleod, C. & McCarty, M. Studies on the Chemical Nature of

     the Substance Inducing Transformation of Pneumococcal Types : Induction
     of Transformation by a Desoxyribonucleic Acid Fraction Isolated From

     Pneumococcus Type Iii. J Exp Med 79, 137{58 (1944).

19.  Watson, J. & Crick, F. A structure for deoxyribose nucleic acid. 1953.

     Nature 421, 397{8; discussion 396 (2003).

20.  Smith, H. & Wilcox, K. A restriction enzyme from Hemophilus inuenzae.
     I. Puri▯cation and general properties. J Mol Biol 51, 379{91 (1970).

21.  Nathans, D. & Smith, H. Restriction endonucleases in the analysis and

     restructuring of DNA molecules. Annu Rev Biochem 44, 273{93 (1975).

22.  Cohen, S., Chang, A., Boyer, H. & Helling, R. Construction of biologically

     functional bacterial plasmids in vitro. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 70, 3240{4
     (1973).

23.  Jackson, D., Symons, R. & Berg, P. Biochemical method for inserting new

     genetic information into DNA of Simian Virus 40: circular SV40 DNA

     molecules containing lambda phage genes and the galactose operon of Es-
     cherichia coli. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 69, 2904{9 (1972).





                                      36
                                                          BIBLIOGRAPHY



24.  Lobban, P. & Kaiser, A. Enzymatic end-to end joining of DNA molecules.

     J Mol Biol 78, 453{71 (1973).

25.  Fiers, W. et al. Complete nucleotide sequence of bacteriophage MS2 RNA:
     primary and secondary structure of the replicase gene. Nature 260, 500{7

     (1976).

26.  Maxam, A. & Gilbert, W. A new method for sequencing DNA. Proc Natl

     Acad Sci U S A 74, 560{4 (1977).

27.  Sanger, F. & Coulson, A. A rapid method for determining sequences in
     DNA by primed synthesis with DNA polymerase. J Mol Biol 94, 441{8

     (1975).

28.  Sanger, F., Nicklen, S. & Coulson, A. DNA sequencing with chain-terminating

     inhibitors. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 74, 5463{7 (1977).

29.  Zuckerkandl, E. & Pauling, L. Molecules as documents of evolutionary
     history. J Theor Biol 8, 357{66 (1965).

30.  Luria, S. & Delbruck, M. Mutations of Bacteria from Virus Sensitivity to

     Virus Resistance. Genetics 28, 491{511 (1943).

31.  Saitou, N. & Nei, M. The neighbor-joining method: a new method for

     reconstructing phylogenetic trees. Mol Biol Evol 4, 406{25 (1987).

32.  Balch, W., Magrum, L., Fox, G., Wolfe, R. & Woese, C. An ancient diver-
     gence among the bacteria. J Mol Evol 9, 305{11 (1977).

33.  Fox, G., Magrum, L., Balch, W., Wolfe, R. & Woese, C. Classi▯cation of

     methanogenic bacteria by 16S ribosomal RNA characterization. Proc Natl

     Acad Sci U S A 74, 4537{41 (1977).

34.  Woese, C. & Fox, G. Phylogenetic structure of the prokaryotic domain: the
     primary kingdoms. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 74, 5088{90 (1977).

35.  Lan, R. & Reeves, P. Escherichia coli in disguise: molecular origins of

     Shigella. Microbes Infect 4, 1125{32 (2002).

36.  Johnson, J. Shigella and Escherichia coli at the crossroads: machiavellian

     masqueraders or taxonomic treachery? J Med Microbiol 49, 583{5 (2000).






                                      37
                                                          BIBLIOGRAPHY



37.  Fleischmann, R. et al. Whole-genome random sequencing and assembly of

     Haemophilus inuenzae Rd. Science 269, 496{512 (1995).

38.  Murray, K. DNA sequencing by mass spectrometry. J Mass Spectrom 31,
     1203{15 (1996).

39.  Go▯eau, A. et al. Life with 6000 genes. Science 274, 546, 563{7 (1996).

40.  Lander, E. et al. Initial sequencing and analysis of the human genome.

     Nature 409, 860{921 (2001).

41.  Adams, M. et al. The genome sequence of Drosophila melanogaster. Science

     287, 2185{95 (2000).

42.  NCBI. Genome Project Website (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genomes/lproks.cgi,
     2012).

43.  Alm, R. & Trust, T. Analysis of the genetic diversity of Helicobacter pylori:

     the tale of two genomes. J Mol Med (Berl) 77, 834{46 (1999).

44.  Fleischmann, R. et al. Whole-genome comparison of Mycobacterium tuber-

     culosis clinical and laboratory strains. J Bacteriol 184, 5479{90 (2002).

45.  Pizza, M. et al. Identi▯cation of vaccine candidates against serogroup B
     meningococcus by whole-genome sequencing. Science 287, 1816{20 (2000).

46.  Rappuoli, R. Reverse vaccinology. Curr Opin Microbiol 3, 445{50 (2000).


47.  Gossger, N. et al. Immunogenicity and tolerability of recombinant serogroup
     B meningococcal vaccine administered with or without routine infant vac-

     cinations according to di▯erent immunization schedules: a randomized con-
     trolled trial. JAMA 307, 573{82 (2012).

48.  Ochman, H. & Moran, N. Genes lost and genes found: evolution of bacterial

     pathogenesis and symbiosis. Science 292, 1096{9 (2001).

49.  Van Ham, R. et al. Reductive genome evolution in Buchnera aphidicola.

     Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 100, 581{6 (2003).

50.  Djelouadji, Z., Raoult, D. & Drancourt, M. Palaeogenomics of Mycobac-
     terium tuberculosis: epidemic bursts with a degrading genome. Lancet In-

     fect Dis 11, 641{50 (2011).






                                      38
                                                           BIBLIOGRAPHY



51.  Singh, P. & Cole, S. Mycobacterium leprae: genes, pseudogenes and genetic

     diversity. Future Microbiol 6, 57{71 (2011).

52.  Vissa, V. & Brennan, P. The genome of Mycobacterium leprae: a minimal
     mycobacterial gene set. Genome Biol 2, 1023 (2001).

53.  Cole, S. et al. Massive gene decay in the leprosy bacillus. Nature 409,

     1007{11 (2001).

54.  Han, X. et al. A new Mycobacterium species causing di▯use lepromatous

     leprosy. Am J Clin Pathol 130, 856{64 (2008).

55.  Han, X. et al. Comparative sequence analysis of Mycobacterium leprae
     and the new leprosy-causing Mycobacterium lepromatosis. J Bacteriol 191,

     6067{74 (2009).

56.  Smith, J., Smith, N., O’Rourke, M. & Spratt, B. How clonal are bacteria?

     Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 90, 4384{8 (1993).

57.  Parkhill, J. et al. Genome sequence of Yersinia pestis, the causative agent
     of plague. Nature 413, 523{7 (2001).

58.  Van Ert, M. et al. Global genetic population structure of Bacillus anthracis.

     PLoS One 2, e461 (2007).

59.  Han, C. et al. Pathogenomic sequence analysis of Bacillus cereus and Bacil-

     lus thuringiensis isolates closely related to Bacillus anthracis. J Bacteriol
     188, 3382{90 (2006).

60.  Read, T. et al. The genome sequence of Bacillus anthracis Ames and com-

     parison to closely related bacteria. Nature 423, 81{6 (2003).

61.  Eppinger, M., Baar, C., Raddatz, G., Huson, D. & Schuster, S. Compar-

     ative analysis of four Campylobacterales. Nat Rev Microbiol 2, 872{85
     (2004).

62.  Furuta, Y. et al. Birth and death of genes linked to chromosomal inversion.

     Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 108, 1501{6 (2011).

63.  Armstrong, G., Conn, L. & Pinner, R. Trends in infectious disease mortal-

     ity in the United States during the 20th century. JAMA 281, 61{6 (1999).






                                      39
                                                           BIBLIOGRAPHY



64.  Hinman, A. Global progress in infectious disease control. Vaccine 16, 1116{

     21 (1998).

65.  Stewart, G., Robertson, B. & Young, D. Tuberculosis: a problem with
     persistence. Nat Rev Microbiol 1, 97{105 (2003).

66.  Neu, H. The crisis in antibiotic resistance. Science 257, 1064{73 (1992).

67.  Bush, K. et al. Tackling antibiotic resistance. Nat Rev Microbiol 9, 894{6

     (2011).

68.  Dijkshoorn, L., Nemec, A. & Seifert, H. An increasing threat in hospitals:

     multidrug-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii. Nat Rev Microbiol 5, 939{51
     (2007).

69.  Maltezou, H. Metallo-beta-lactamases in Gram-negative bacteria: intro-

     ducing the era of pan-resistance? Int J Antimicrob Agents 33, 405.e1{7

     (2009).

70.  Bonomo, R. New Delhi metallo{lactamase and multidrug resistance: a
     global SOS? Clin Infect Dis 52, 485{7 (2011).

71.  Loman, N. & Pallen, M. XDR-TB genome sequencing: a glimpse of the

     microbiology of the future. Future Microbiol 3, 111{3 (2008).

72.  Saleem, A., Ahmed, I., Mir, F., Ali, S. & Zaidi, A. Pan-resistant Acineto-

     bacter infection in neonates in Karachi, Pakistan. J Infect Dev Ctries 4,
     30{7 (2010).

73.  Udwadia, Z., Amale, R., Ajbani, K. & Rodrigues, C. Totally drug-resistant

     tuberculosis in India. Clin Infect Dis 54, 579{81 (2012).

74.  Wenzel, R. The antibiotic pipeline{challenges, costs, and values. N Engl J

     Med 351, 523{6 (2004).

75.  Maiden, M. et al. Multilocus sequence typing: a portable approach to the
     identi▯cation of clones within populations of pathogenic microorganisms.

     Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 95, 3140{5 (1998).

76.  Achtman, M. A surfeit of YATMs? J Clin Microbiol 34, 1870 (1996).








                                      40
                                                           BIBLIOGRAPHY



77.  Selander, R. et al. Methods of multilocus enzyme electrophoresis for bacte-

     rial population genetics and systematics. Appl Environ Microbiol 51, 873{
     84 (1986).

78.  Lindstedt, B. Multiple-locus variable number tandem repeats analysis for

     genetic ▯ngerprinting of pathogenic bacteria. Electrophoresis 26, 2567{82
     (2005).


79.  Anderson, D., Kuhns, J., Vasil, M., Gerding, D. & Jano▯, E. DNA ▯nger-
     printing by pulsed ▯eld gel electrophoresis and ribotyping to distinguish

     Pseudomonas cepacia isolates from a nosocomial outbreak. J Clin Micro-
     biol 29, 648{9 (1991).

80.  Arbeit, R. et al. Resolution of recent evolutionary divergence among Es-

     cherichia coli from related lineages: the application of pulsed ▯eld elec-

     trophoresis to molecular epidemiology. J Infect Dis 161, 230{5 (1990).

81.  Tenover, F. et al. Interpreting chromosomal DNA restriction patterns pro-
     duced by pulsed-▯eld gel electrophoresis: criteria for bacterial strain typing.

     J Clin Microbiol 33, 2233{9 (1995).

82.  Saiki, R. et al. Primer-directed enzymatic ampli▯cation of DNA with a

     thermostable DNA polymerase. Science 239, 487{91 (1988).

83.  Woods, C., Versalovic, J., Koeuth, T. & Lupski, J. Whole-cell repetitive
     element sequence-based polymerase chain reaction allows rapid assessment

     of clonal relationships of bacterial isolates. J Clin Microbiol 31, 1927{31

     (1993).

84.  Roumagnac, P. et al. Evolutionary history of Salmonella typhi. Science
     314, 1301{4 (2006).

85.  Wirth, T. et al. Sex and virulence in Escherichia coli: an evolutionary

     perspective. Mol Microbiol 60, 1136{51 (2006).

86.  Bartual, S. et al. Development of a multilocus sequence typing scheme

     for characterization of clinical isolates of Acinetobacter baumannii. J Clin
     Microbiol 43, 4382{90 (2005).








                                      41
                                                          BIBLIOGRAPHY



87.  Diancourt, L., Passet, V., Nemec, A., Dijkshoorn, L. & Brisse, S. The

     population structure of Acinetobacter baumannii: expanding multiresistant
     clones from an ancestral susceptible genetic pool. PLoS One 5, e10034

     (2010).

88.  Baker, L., Brown, T., Maiden, M. & Drobniewski, F. Silent nucleotide
     polymorphisms and a phylogeny for Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Emerg

     Infect Dis 10, 1568{77 (2004).

89.  Comas, I., Homolka, S., Niemann, S. & Gagneux, S. Genotyping of genet-

     ically monomorphic bacteria: DNA sequencing in Mycobacterium tuber-
     culosis highlights the limitations of current methodologies. PLoS One 4,

     e7815 (2009).

90.  Margulies, M. et al. Genome sequencing in microfabricated high-density

     picolitre reactors. Nature 437, 376{80 (2005).

91.  Wheeler, D. et al. The complete genome of an individual by massively
     parallel DNA sequencing. Nature 452, 872{6 (2008).

92.  Bennett, S. Solexa Ltd. Pharmacogenomics 5, 433{8 (2004).


93.  Bentley, D. et al. Accurate whole human genome sequencing using re-
     versible terminator chemistry. Nature 456, 53{9 (2008).

94.  Metzker, M. Sequencing technologies - the next generation. Nat Rev Genet

     11, 31{46 (2010).

95.  McKernan, K. et al. Sequence and structural variation in a human genome

     uncovered by short-read, massively parallel ligation sequencing using two-
     base encoding. Genome Res 19, 1527{41 (2009).

96.  Pushkarev, D., Ne▯, N. & Quake, S. Single-molecule sequencing of an in-

     dividual human genome. Nat Biotechnol 27, 847{50 (2009).

97.  Eid, J. et al. Real-time DNA sequencing from single polymerase molecules.
     Science 323, 133{8 (2009).


98.  Rothberg, J. et al. An integrated semiconductor device enabling non-optical
     genome sequencing. Nature 475, 348{52 (2011).







                                      42
                                                           BIBLIOGRAPHY



 99.  Smith, T. & Waterman, M. Identi▯cation of common molecular subse-

      quences. J Mol Biol 147, 195{7 (1981).

100.  Needleman, S. & Wunsch, C. A general method applicable to the search
      for similarities in the amino acid sequence of two proteins. J Mol Biol 48,

      443{53 (1970).

101.  Pop, M. & Salzberg, S. Bioinformatics challenges of new sequencing tech-

      nology. Trends Genet 24, 142{9 (2008).

102.  Li, H., Ruan, J. & Durbin, R. Mapping short DNA sequencing reads and
      calling variants using mapping quality scores. Genome Res 18, 1851{8

      (2008).

103.  Li, H. & Durbin, R. Fast and accurate long-read alignment with Burrows-
      Wheeler transform. Bioinformatics 26, 589{95 (2010).


104.  Ru▯alo, M., LaFramboise, T. & Koyutu    rk, M. Comparative analysis of
      algorithms for next-generation sequencing read alignment. Bioinformatics

      27, 2790{6 (2011).

105.  Ning, Z., Cox, A. & Mullikin, J. SSAHA: a fast search method for large
      DNA databases. Genome Res 11, 1725{9 (2001).


106.  Galinsky, V. YOABS: yet other aligner of biological sequences{an e▯cient
      linearly scaling nucleotide aligner. Bioinformatics 28, 1070{7 (2012).

107.  Paszkiewicz, K. & Studholme, D. De novo assembly of short sequence reads.

      Brief Bioinform 11, 457{72 (2010).

108.  Zerbino, D. & Birney, E. Velvet: algorithms for de novo short read assembly

      using de Bruijn graphs. Genome Res 18, 821{9 (2008).

109.  Li, R. et al. The sequence and de novo assembly of the giant panda genome.
      Nature 463, 311{7 (2010).

110.  Simpson, J. et al. ABySS: a parallel assembler for short read sequence data.

      Genome Res 19, 1117{23 (2009).

111.  Delcher, A., Bratke, K., Powers, E. & Salzberg, S. Identifying bacterial

      genes and endosymbiont DNA with Glimmer. Bioinformatics 23, 673{9
      (2007).





                                       43
                                                           BIBLIOGRAPHY



112.  Borodovsky, M. & Lomsadze, A. Gene identi▯cation in prokaryotic genomes,

      phages, metagenomes, and EST sequences with GeneMarkS suite. Curr
      Protoc Bioinformatics Chapter 4, Unit 4.5.1{17 (2011).

113.  Altschul, S. et al. Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of

      protein database search programs. Nucleic Acids Res 25, 3389{402 (1997).

114.  Lowe, T. & Eddy, S. tRNAscan-SE: a program for improved detection of

      transfer RNA genes in genomic sequence. Nucleic Acids Res 25, 955{64
      (1997).

115.  Lagesen, K. et al. RNAmmer: consistent and rapid annotation of ribosomal

      RNA genes. Nucleic Acids Res 35, 3100{8 (2007).

116.  Sayers, E. et al. Database resources of the National Center for Biotechnol-

      ogy Information. Nucleic Acids Res 40, D13{25 (2012).

117.  Chaudhuri, R. et al. xBASE2: a comprehensive resource for comparative
      bacterial genomics. Nucleic Acids Res 36, D543{6 (2008).

118.  Harris, S. et al. Evolution of MRSA during hospital transmission and in-

      tercontinental spread. Science 327, 469{74 (2010).

119.  Croucher, N. et al. Rapid pneumococcal evolution in response to clinical

      interventions. Science 331, 430{4 (2011).

120.  Monot, M. et al. Comparative genomic and phylogeographic analysis of
      Mycobacterium leprae. Nat Genet 41, 1282{9 (2009).

121.  He, M. et al. Evolutionary dynamics of Clostridium di▯cile over short and

      long time scales. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 107, 7527{32 (2010).

122.  Stabler, R. et al. Comparative genome and phenotypic analysis of Clostrid-

      ium di▯cile 027 strains provides insight into the evolution of a hyperviru-
      lent bacterium. Genome Biol 10, R102 (2009).

123.  Chin, C. et al. The origin of the Haitian cholera outbreak strain. N Engl J

      Med 364, 33{42 (2011).

124.  Mutreja, A. et al. Evidence for several waves of global transmission in the

      seventh cholera pandemic. Nature 477, 462{5 (2011).






                                       44
                                                           BIBLIOGRAPHY



125.  Beres, S. et al. Molecular complexity of successive bacterial epidemics de-

      convoluted by comparative pathogenomics. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 107,
      4371{6 (2010).

126.  Fittipaldi, N., Olsen, R., Beres, S., Van Beneden, C. & Musser, J. Genomic

      Analysis of emm59 Group A Streptococcus Invasive Strains, United States.
      Emerg Infect Dis 18, 650{2 (2012).


127.  Gilmour, M. et al. High-throughput genome sequencing of two Listeria
      monocytogenes clinical isolates during a large foodborne outbreak. BMC

      Genomics 11, 120 (2010).

128.  Lienau, E. et al. Identi▯cation of a salmonellosis outbreak by means of
      molecular sequencing. N Engl J Med 364, 981{2 (2011).


129.  Rasko, D. et al. Bacillus anthracis comparative genome analysis in support
      of the Amerithrax investigation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 108, 5027{32

      (2011).

130.  Golubchik, T. et al. Pneumococcal genome sequencing tracks a vaccine
      escape variant formed through a multi-fragment recombination event. Nat

      Genet 44, 352{5 (2012).

131.  Ou, C. et al. Molecular epidemiology of HIV transmission in a dental prac-

      tice. Science 256, 1165{71 (1992).

132.  Jones, A. et al. Importation of multidrug-resistant Acinetobacter spp in-
      fections with casualties from Iraq. Lancet Infect Dis 6, 317{8 (2006).


133.  Holt, K. et al. High-throughput sequencing provides insights into genome
      variation and evolution in Salmonella Typhi. Nat Genet 40, 987{93 (2008).

134.  Handelsman, J. Metagenomics: application of genomics to uncultured mi-

      croorganisms. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 68, 669{85 (2004).

135.  Raghunathan, A. et al. Genomic DNA ampli▯cation from a single bac-
      terium. Appl Environ Microbiol 71, 3342{7 (2005).


136.  Marcy, Y. et al. Dissecting biological "dark matter" with single-cell genetic
      analysis of rare and uncultivated TM7 microbes from the human mouth.

      Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104, 11889{94 (2007).





                                       45
                                                           BIBLIOGRAPHY



137.  Walker, A. & Parkhill, J. Single-cell genomics. Nat Rev Microbiol 6, 176{7

      (2008).

138.  Yilmaz, S. & Singh, A. Single cell genome sequencing. Curr Opin Biotech-
      nol (2011).

139.  Woyke, T. et al. One bacterial cell, one complete genome. PLoS One 5,

      e10314 (2010).

140.  Hall, L. & Henderson-Begg, S. Hypermutable bacteria isolated from humans{
      a critical analysis. Microbiology 152, 2505{14 (2006).


141.  Mart▯▯nez, J., Baquero, F. & Andersson, D. Predicting antibiotic resistance.
      Nat Rev Microbiol 5, 958{65 (2007).

142.  Ruzin, A., Keeney, D. & Bradford, P. AdeABC multidrug e▯ux pump

      is associated with decreased susceptibility to tigecycline in Acinetobacter
      calcoaceticus-Acinetobacter baumannii complex. J Antimicrob Chemother

      59, 1001{4 (2007).

143.  Fraser, M. et al. Structure of Shiga toxin type 2 (Stx2) from Escherichia

      coli O157:H7. J Biol Chem 279, 27511{7 (2004).

144.  Pallen, M., Beatson, S. & Bailey, C. Bioinformatics analysis of the locus for
      enterocyte e▯acement provides novel insights into type-III secretion. BMC

      Microbiol 5, 9 (2005).

145.  Kawrykow, A. et al. Phylo: a citizen science approach for improving mul-

      tiple sequence alignment. PLoS One 7, e31362 (2012).

146.  Khatib, F. et al. Crystal structure of a monomeric retroviral protease solved
      by protein folding game players. Nat Struct Mol Biol 18, 1175{7 (2011).

147.  Genomic data from Escherichia coli O104:H4 isolate TY-2482. BGI Shen-

      zhen. doi:10.5524/100001 (2011).

148.  Loman, N. J. 2012. <http://pathogenomics.bham.ac.uk/blog>.

149.  Li, J. et al. SEQanswers: an open access community for collaboratively

      decoding genomes. Bioinformatics 28, 1272{3 (2012).

150.  Li, J. et al. The SEQanswers wiki: a wiki database of tools for high-
      throughput sequencing analysis. Nucleic Acids Res 40, D1313{7 (2012).





                                       46
                                                      BIBLIOGRAPHY



151.  Schneider, G. & Dekker, C. DNA sequencing with nanopores. Nat Biotech-

      nol 30, 326{8 (2012).

152.  Mokili, J., Rohwer, F. & Dutilh, B. Metagenomics and future perspectives
      in virus discovery. Curr Opin Virol 2, 63{77 (2012).




















































                                    47
Chapter 2

High-throughput whole-genome

sequencing to dissect the

epidemiology of Acinetobacter
baumannii isolates from a

hospital outbreak















                 48
Use of high-throughput whole-genome sequencing to dissect the epidemiology of

Acinetobacter baumannii isolates from a hospital outbreak



                 a                         b                  b                    a
*Dr Tom Lewis , *Dr Nicholas J. Loman , Dr Lewis Bingle , Dr Pauline Jumaa , Professor
                       c                         a                               b,#
George M. Weinstock , Dr Deborah Mortiboy and Professor Mark J. Pallen

aDepartment of Medical Microbiology, University Hospitals Birmingham NHS

Foundation Trust, Birmingham, UK

bCentre for Systems Biology, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK

c
 Department of Genetics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri,

USA



*These authors contributed equally to this work

# Corresponding author. Address: Centre for Systems Biology, University of


Birmingham, Birmingham, B15 2TT, UK. Tel: +44 121 414 7163.

E-mail: m.pallen@bham.ac.uk

Running title High-throughput sequencing of Acinetobacter isolates













































                                                  1
Summary


Shared care of military and civilian patients has resulted in transmission of multi-drug-

resistant Acinetobacter baumannii (MDR-Aci) from military casualties to civilians. Current
typing technologies have proven useful in revealing relationships between A. baumannii
isolates. However, they are unable to resolve differences between closely related isolates
from small-scale outbreaks, where chains of transmission are often unclear. In a recent
hospital outbreak in Birmingham, six patients were colonized with MDR-Aci isolates

indistinguishable using standard techniques. We have used whole-genome sequencing to
identify single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in these isolates, allowing us to
discriminate between alternative epidemiological hypotheses in this setting.



















































                                             2
Introduction


In the United Kingdom, military casualties are usually repatriated to Selly Oak Hospital,
Birmingham, where they are cared for alongside civilian patients. Military patients from
Iraq and Afghanistan are often colonized with strains of multi-drug-resistant A.
                                                                                         1-6
baumannii (MDR-Aci), which can spread to civilian patients and health-care workers.
Molecular typing systems, such as pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) and variable-
number tandem repeat (VNTR) analyses, have provided evidence of multiple concurrent
or successive clonal outbreaks in hospitals across the UK.  7-8However, these methods

have been unable to provide sufficient resolution to determine chains of transmission
within apparently clonal outbreaks. Nor can they provide detailed information on
patterns of spread (e.g. the influence of “super-shedders”, environmental persistence,

staff carriage or infection control practices), even though these questions are important
when considering where to focus finite infection control resources.

A recent MDR-Aci outbreak in Selly Oak Hospital illustrates some of these problems. Four

military patients, admitted over a five-week period, were each found to be colonised with
MDR-Aci a few days after admission. Subsequently, indistinguishable isolates were
recovered from two civilian patients on the same unit. Molecular typing distinguished
isolates from this outbreak from those recovered from a similar outbreak in 2007 (same

PFGE type, different VNTR type). However, such approaches were unable to shed light on
transmission events within the 2008 outbreak itself.

Whole-genome sequencing represents the ultimate molecular typing method for bacteria,

because it samples the entire collection of genetic information within each isolate.
Pioneering work on the “Amerithrax” strain of Bacillus anthracis illustrated the utility of
this approach as long ago as 2002. However, until recently, the cost and technical
complexity of bacterial whole-genome sequencing placed it beyond the reach of the

average diagnostic laboratory or academic research group. This has changed in the last
couple of years with the advent of “high-throughput sequencing”—an umbrella term for
several competing technologies that deliver genome sequences around one hundred times

more quickly and more cheaply than conventional sequencing approaches (see recent
review by Metzker ). All such technologies do away with the need for cloning of DNA in
biological systems and instead rely on massively parallel in vitro amplification of template
molecules attached to a solid surface.


Several recent studies have shown that analysis of single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in bacterial genomes provides a means of determining relatedness between
epidemiologically linked isolates and tracking bacterial evolution over periods of months
         11-16
to years.     Furthermore, the massive depth of coverage provided by high-throughput
sequencing means that, when looking for rare genomic changes, it becomes efficient to
pool samples and identity variable loci by polymorphisms within the consensus sequence.
SNPs can then be quickly and easily assigned to individual isolates by a small number of

confirmatory PCRs.

Despite the promise of these new technologies, at the outset of this study, it remained
unclear whether MDR-Aci lineages associated with individual patients harbour SNPs

capable of providing useful epidemiological information. We therefore applied one
particular high-throughput sequencing technology—454 pyrosequencing—to isolates
from our outbreak in the hope of gaining additional epidemiological information.


Methods


                                                3
Microbiology


A. baumannii isolates were obtained from routine clinical samples. Bacterial identification
and antibiotic susceptibility testing was performed on the Vitek 2 system according to the
manufacturer’s instructions (bioMérieux, Basingstoke, UK), supplemented by CLSI-
recommended confirmatory testing. Isolates were frozen on beads and stored at -20 C.  °
Isolates M1, M2, M3, M4 were obtained from wound swabs from military patients. Isolates

C1 and C2 were obtained from sputum cultures from civilian patients. Isolates C1-2a and
C1-2b were distinct colonies from the same wound specimen, taken two weeks after the
initial isolate from civilian patient C1. Isolates C1-3a and C1-3b were isolates from a
different wound specimen, taken at the same time as isolates C1-2a and C1-2b. Multidrug

resistance was defined as resistance to ≥ 3 classes of antibiotics (quinolones, extended-
spectrum cephalosporins, ß-lactam/ß-lactamase inhibitor combinations, aminoglycosides
and carbapenems). MDR-Aci isolates were sent to the Laboratory of HealthCare Associated
Infection for speciation and PFGE and VNTR analysis. Antibiotic sensitivities were

confirmed by agar dilution methods in two isolates (M1 and C1).

Isolation of genomic DNA and 454 sequencing


Genomic DNA was obtained from colony-purified MDR-Aci, using the DNeasy DNA
extraction kit (Qiagen, Crawley, UK). DNA was sequenced using 454 Titanium protocols
(Roche, Welwyn Garden City, Hertfordshire, UK) at the University of Liverpool’s Centre
for Genomic Research. DNA samples from isolates M1 and C1 were each sequenced on a
quarter plate; the sample from isolate C2 was sequenced on two quarter-plates.

Approximately equal quantities of DNA from isolates M2, M3, M4 and C1-2a were pooled
and sequenced on a full Titanium plate.

Analysis of genome sequence and of sequence variants


454 sequence reads were assembled using Newbler 2.0.01.14 (Roche, Welwyn Garden
City, Hertfordshire, UK). We combined the sequence data from all MDR-Aci isolates to
create a consensus outbreak assembly. The gsMapper component of Newbler was then

used to map each set of sequence reads against the consensus assembly. False positive
variants resulting from sequencing errors were excluded, generating a set of high-
confidence variants. This set was subjected to several additional rounds of filtering
using xBASE-NG to generate a set of well-trusted SNPs. During this process, we

discarded
    1. insertions and deletions
    2. variants present in < 90% of mapped reads from the runs with single genomes,
        or in <25% of reads from the pooled sample.

    3. variants with excess coverage, > 1 standard deviation from the mean (i.e. in
        repetitive regions).
    4. variants occurring within 200 bases of a contig boundary.
    5. variants occurring in clusters (≥3 SNPs in 1000 base pairs)
    6. variants not flanked by good-quality coverage for ≥ 20 basepairs.

    7. variants where the ancestral state could not be determined by reference to
        published genomes using BLASTN

Validation of single nucleotide polymorphisms


All well-trusted SNPs were investigated by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and Sanger
sequencing. The sequences of the primers used for this purpose were as follows: SNP1
TAAGGCAGAACAAAGCGTGA/AATCGGTTCTGAGGTTTGGA (product size 222bp); SNP2

                                               4
GGTGAACCTTGGTGGTGGTA/AGCTTTAATGGCTGCTCGAA (product size 222bp); SNP3
CATTTCCGAAACCCTCTGAT/AGGCGGTATTTGATGATCTTG (product size 218bp).



PCR products were purified by ethanol precipitation and sequenced on a 3730 DNA
analyser (Applied Biosystems, Warrington, UK). The sequences of SNP loci from isolates
C1-2b, C1-3a and C1-3b were determined only by sequencing of PCR products.


Results

Description of the outbreak


MDR-Aci was isolated from specimens from five male patients, admitted to the Selly Oak
Hospital critical care unit over a six-week period in late 2008. Three patients were
military [M1, M2, M3]; two were civilian [C1, C2]. MDR-Aci was also isolated from a
wound swab from a military patient [M4] in a nearby trauma ward. Figure 1 shows a
time line of the MDR-Aci cases on the critical care unit. The critical care unit is split into

a ten-bedded unit and a six bedded-unit, separated by a narrow corridor. Most military
patients are admitted to the six-bedded unit, which includes a four-bedded bay (beds 1-
4) and a two-bedded bay (beds 5-6), separated by an open thoroughway to the main
unit. Patient C1 was first found to be colonized while on the main ten-bedded unit, and

was subsequently transferred to the six-bedded unit. The other four MDR-Aci-positive
critical-care patients (M1, M2, M3, C2) were cared for exclusively in the six-bedded unit.

All MDR-Aci isolates had an identical profile by PFGE and VNTR analyses and all fell
within European clone 1 (Turton, personal communication; data not shown). The 18

antibiotic resistance profile was also identical for all isolates (resistant to meropenem,
piptazobactam, amikacin; sensitive to gentamicin and tigecycline).

The first MDR-Aci isolate was from patient M1. The last isolate came from patient C2,

who yielded a positive sample in week 7. During our initial epidemiological evaluation,
we assumed that all military patients were colonised prior to admission. However, the
events leading to colonisation of the civilian patients remained unclear. In particular,
several epidemiological scenarios could explain the acquisition of MDR-Aci by patient C2
(Figure 1):

    1. Transmission from M1. C2 was nursed in a bed next to M1 during week 2.
    2. Transmission from M2. C2 was nursed in a bed next to M2 during week 4.
    3. Transmission from M3, who occupied a nearby bed space in the six-bedded unit
        in the two weeks before MDR-Aci was first isolated from C2.

    4. Transmission from C1, who occupied a nearby bed space in the six-bedded unit
        in the week before MDR-Aci was first isolated from C2
    5. Acquisition from an unknown source, such as an environmental reservoir or an
        unidentified patient or health worker.

Transmission from M4 was rendered unlikely by the lack of proximity to C2 in time and
space.

Whole-genome sequencing of outbreak strains


Complete genome sequence data was obtained from the initial MDR-Aci isolates from
the six patients plus one additional isolate from patient C1 obtained two weeks after
colonisation was first detected (C1-2a) (Table 1). The consensus outbreak assembly
output by Newbler comprised 4,110,513 base-pairs, containing 107 contigs ≥500 base-

pairs. Average contig size was 38,416 base-pairs, with an assembly N50 of 79,057 base-

                                              5
pairs. The largest contig was 230,667 base pairs. As predicted from multiplex PCR
(reference 8) and PFGE analysis, the outbreak strains align most closely with sequences

from other representatives of European clone 1 (data not shown).

Detection and interpretation of SNPs

Several hundred variants were discarded (supplementary data) during the filtering of

variants to create high-quality informative SNPs associated with three polymorphic loci
(Table 2). The sequences at each SNP locus in each isolate (including those that had not
been genome-sequenced) were determined by PCR and Sanger sequencing. For the
genome-sequenced isolates, there was complete agreement here with the 454 data. The

SNPs were placed in a biological and phylogenetic context by reference to the complete
genome sequence of the European clone 1 strain AB0057. This comparison identified
the M1 isolate as bearing the ancestral genotype at all three SNP loci.


The first SNP distinguishes all the other outbreak isolates (M2, M3, M4, C1, C2) from the
ancestral/M1 state. A second SNP separates the C1 isolate from all the other isolates,
while a third SNP differentiates the M3 isolate from all the other isolates. No SNPs were
detected between isolates from patients C2, M2 or M4. Interestingly, patients M2 and M4

were injured in the same incident and had similar pathways of care until arrival in Selly
Oak Hospital. However, once in Birmingham, patient M4 did not come into close contact
with patients M2 and C2.

If we assume that all military patients acquired MDR-Aci before arrival in Birmingham,

then SNP 1 must have been acquired before admission and so patient M1 cannot be the
source of any of the civilian cases (Figure 1). Transmission of MDR-Aci from C1 or M3 to
C2 is ruled out by the very low probability of reversion to the ancestral state for SNPs 2
and 3. Therefore, we conclude that the most parsimonious interpretation of the data is

that patient C2 acquired MDR-Aci from patient M2.

Discussion


Current typing systems have provided valuable insights into the epidemiology of MDR-
Aci. However, we postulated that whole-genome sequencing might provide more
detailed resolution between bacterial isolates from a hospital outbreak. Here, we have
shown that closely related MDR-Aci lineages contain SNPs that can shed light on

transmission events within a small-scale outbreak and can discriminate between
alternative epidemiological hypotheses.

Our analyses support transmission of MDR-Aci from the wound of a military patient M2

to the respiratory tract of a civilian patient C2. However, as MDR-Aci was not isolated
from C2 until several weeks after M2 left the adjacent bed, we cannot determine when
and how transmission occurred. One possibility is that C2 became colonised when the
two patients were nursed together, but that colonization did not reach detectable levels
in the sputum until much later. Another possibility is that M2 contaminated the local

environment and C2 acquired the organism from the environment only after M2 had left
the ward. This latter option would be consistent with a significant role of the
environment in transmission of MDR-Aci, as suggested by others.     20-24


Other uncertainties remain in the epidemiology of this outbreak. In particular, we were
not able to determine the source and mode of MDR-Aci transmission to patient C1. The
isolate from this patient contained a SNP not present in any of the military isolates and
prior to detection of MDR-Aci, this patient never came into close proximity with any

                                               6
other patients known to be colonized. Curiously, one of the five MDR-Aci isolates from
this patient (C1-2a) possessed three additional SNPs not found in any of the other
isolates (data not shown). The co-existence of two closely related but distinct lineages of
MDR-Aci in samples from the same patient remains puzzling and perhaps reflects two

separate acquisition events before arrival in Birmingham.

In conclusion, we have highlighted the potential of whole-genome sequencing in the
analysis of hospital outbreaks. However, it is worth stressing that in considering only
well-validated SNPs, we have been conservative in our analysis and in future studies,

additional phylogenetic analyses (e.g. of short repeats, indels or re-arrangements)
twinned with genome finishing methods, such as gap closure, might provide further
discrimination between closely related MDR-Aci isolates.

It is also clear that additional studies are needed to benchmark genomic variability

within populations of MDR-Aci colonizing individual patients, to determine how
frequently SNPs arise within a lineage, to dissect the local, national and global
population genomics of A. baumannii at the highest resolution possible and to optimise
use of this technology in hospital infection control. In addition, this technology is certain

to illuminate key biological differences between isolates by revealing the genetic
determinants associated with virulence or antibiotic resistance. Furthermore, as
improvements in high-throughput sequencing result in reduced costs and increased
efficiency, whole-genome sequencing will increasingly come within the reach of clinical
microbiology laboratories. It is not hard to imagine a time when genome sequencing

replaces gel-based methods as the typing method of choice for bacterial nosocomial
pathogens.

Sequence Data


454 sequencing reads have been deposited to the NCBI Short Read Archive under
reference SRA010038. Supplementary data is available from
http://pathogenomics.bham.ac.uk/acinetobacter/

Funding


Genome sequencing was funded by a Small Research Grant from the Hospital Infection
Society, London, UK. The xBASE facility and Loman’s position are funded by BBSRC
grant BBE0111791.


Acknowledgements

We would like to thank the infection control team at UHB, in particular Jane Heron and
Jane McGeown, for their help in collecting epidemiological information. We thank Jane

Turton and others in the Health Protection Agency’s Laboratory of HealthCare
Associated Infection for PFGE and VNTR data on clinical isolates.












                                              7
References

1.      Turton JF, Kaufmann ME, Gill MJ, et al. Comparison of Acinetobacter baumannii
        isolates from the United Kingdom and the United States that were associated

        with repatriated casualties of the Iraq conflict. J Clin Microbiol. 2006; 44: 2630-4.
2.      Towner KJ. Acinetobacter: an old friend, but a new enemy. J Hosp Infect. 2009;
        73: 355-63.
3.      Peleg AY, Seifert H, Paterson DL. Acinetobacter baumannii: emergence of a
        successful pathogen. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2008; 21: 538-82.

4.      Jones A, Morgan D, Walsh A, et al. Importation of multidrug-resistant
        Acinetobacter spp infections with casualties from Iraq. Lancet Infect Dis. 2006; 6:
        317-8.
5.      Whitman TJ, Qasba SS, Timpone JG, et al. Occupational transmission of
        Acinetobacter baumannii from a United States serviceman wounded in Iraq to a

        health care worker. Clin Infect Dis. 2008; 47: 439-43.
6.      Hujer KM, Hujer AM, Hulten EA, et al. Analysis of antibiotic resistance genes in
        multidrug-resistant Acinetobacter sp. isolates from military and civilian patients
        treated at the Walter Reed Army Medical Center. Antimicrob Agents Chemother.

        2006; 50: 4114-23.
7.      Turton JF, Matos J, Kaufmann ME, Pitt TL. Variable number tandem repeat loci
        providing discrimination within widespread genotypes of Acinetobacter
        baumannii. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis. 2009; 28: 499-507.
8.      Turton JF, Gabriel SN, Valderrey C, Kaufmann ME, Pitt TL. Use of sequence-based

        typing and multiplex PCR to identify clonal lineages of outbreak strains of
        Acinetobacter baumannii. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2007; 13: 807-15.
9.      Read TD, Salzberg SL, Pop M, et al. Comparative genome sequencing for
        discovery of novel polymorphisms in Bacillus anthracis. Science. 2002; 296:
        2028-33.

10.     Metzker ML Sequencing technologies - the next generation. Nat Rev Genet. 2010;
        11: 31-46.
11.     Maharjan RP, Gu C, Reeves PR, Sintchenko V, Gilbert GL, Lan R. Genome-wide
        analysis of single nucleotide polymorphisms in Bordetella pertussis using
        comparative genomic sequencing. Res Microbiol. 2008; 159: 602-8.

12.     Holt KE, Parkhill J, Mazzoni CJ, et al. High-throughput sequencing provides
        insights into genome variation and evolution in Salmonella Typhi. Nat Genet.
        2008; 40: 987-93.
13.     Orsi RH, Borowsky ML, Lauer P, et al. Short-term genome evolution of Listeria

        monocytogenes in a non-controlled environment. BMC Genomics. 2008; 9: 539.
14.     Garcia Pelayo MC, Uplekar S, Keniry A, et al. A comprehensive survey of single
        nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) across Mycobacterium bovis strains and M.
        bovis BCG vaccine strains refines the genealogy and defines a minimal set of
        SNPs that separate virulent M. bovis strains and M. bovis BCG strains. Infect

        Immun. 2009; 77: 2230-8.
15.     Chaudhuri RR, Ren CP, Desmond L, et al. Genome sequencing shows that
        European isolates of Francisella tularensis subspecies tularensis are almost
        identical to US laboratory strain Schu S4. PLoS One. 2007; 2: e352.
16.     Barrick JE, Yu DS, Yoon SH, et al. Genome evolution and adaptation in a long-

        term experiment with Escherichia coli. Nature. 2009; 461: 1243-7.
17.     Chaudhuri RR, Loman NJ, Snyder LA, Bailey CM, Stekel DJ, Pallen MJ. xBASE2: a
        comprehensive resource for comparative bacterial genomics. Nucleic Acids Res.
        2008; 36: D543-6.
18.     Dijkshoorn L, Aucken H, Gerner-Smidt P, et al. Comparison of outbreak and

        nonoutbreak Acinetobacter baumannii strains by genotypic and phenotypic

                                               8
        methods. J Clin Microbiol. 1996; 34: 1519-25.
19.     Adams MD, Goglin K, Molyneaux N, et al. Comparative genome sequence analysis
        of multidrug-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii. J Bacteriol. 2008;190: 8053-64.
20.     Denton M, Wilcox MH, Parnell P, et al. Role of environmental cleaning in

        controlling an outbreak of Acinetobacter baumannii on a neurosurgical intensive
        care unit. J Hosp Infect. 2004; 56: 106-10.
21.     Enoch DA, Summers C, Brown NM, et al. Investigation and management of an
        outbreak of multidrug-carbapenem-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii in
        Cambridge, UK. J Hosp Infect. 2008; 70: 109-18.

22.     Markogiannakis A, Fildisis G, Tsiplakou S, et al. Cross-transmission of multidrug-
        resistant Acinetobacter baumannii clonal strains causing episodes of sepsis in a
        trauma intensive care unit. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol. 2008; 29: 410-7.
23.     Simor AE, Lee M, Vearncombe M, et al. An outbreak due to multiresistant
        Acinetobacter baumannii in a burn unit: risk factors for acquisition and

        management. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol. 2002; 23: 261-7.
24.     Getchell-White SI, Donowitz LG, Groschel DH. The inanimate environment of an
        intensive care unit as a potential source of nosocomial bacteria: evidence for
        long survival of Acinetobacter calcoaceticus. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol.

        1989;10: 402-7.










































                                               9
Figures and Tables

Figure 1 - Legend


Time line showing bedspaces of individual patients while in the six-bedded bay of the
critical care unit. Vertical bars indicate a positive MDR-Aci isolate from the patient and
their corresponding SNP genotype. Patient C2 had sputum samples sent for
microbiological analysis on day 24 and day 42, from which MDR-Aci was not isolated.
Patient C1 was initially admitted to the ten bedded main section of the critical care unit,

on the same day as patient M2 was admitted to the six bedded section. Patient C1 was
first found to be colonized with MDR-Aci two days after patient M2. The arrow shows
proposed transmission from M2 to C2.



















































                                             10
Table 1


      Isolate        Reads     Aligned     Mean coverage depth      SNPs after
                                bases                                filtering
       M1          102,493   4115447       9.6                   1

       C1            68,448  4094862       6.6                   1

       C2            43,540  3991503       4.3                   0
 Pool of 4 isolates601,802   4117083       53.3 (~13x per        5
 (M2, M3, M4, C1-                          isolate)
       2a)


Result of sequencing and mapping alignment showing number of reads generated in
each run, the number of nucleotide bases aligned to the reference consensus genome,
coverage depth and the number of SNPs detected after filtering.













































                                         11
Table 2

                                         SNP loci

                         1                  2                 3

Locus tag        AB57_2551          AB57_2001         AB57_1823

SNP Coordinate   2645863            2093446           1906419

                 Two-component      Hypothetical      Transcriptional
Predicted Productheavy metal        protein           regulator, AraC family
                 response regulator

                                                      Premature
Predicted SNP    Synonymous         Non-synonymous    termination at codon
Effect                              (E to V)          203

                                         Alleles                                                  Alleles

AB0057           C                  A                 G

M1               C                  A                 G

M2               T                  A                 G

M3               T                  A                 T

M4               T                  A                 G

C1               T                  T                 G

C2               T                  A                 G

SNP loci which vary between outbreak isolates are shown. The corresponding

annotation for each locus is shown for the ancestral strain AB0057. Alleles in bold
demonstrate variation from the ancestral state. The predicted effect of the SNP on each
affected protein product is also shown.

























                                     12
                             Weeks

           1       2      3      4      5      6      7

                                          TAG
Bed 3                                 M2
                                                       TAG

     4                                C2

                    M1                               C1
     5
            CAG
     6                ITU 6 bedded unit             M3
                                               TAT

                                      C1
Main ITU                                    TTG


Trauma Unit                                   M4
                                                       TAG
Chapter 3

Whole-genome comparison of two

Acinetobacter baumannii isolates

from a single patient, where
resistance developed during

tigecycline therapy















                 62
 1    Whole-genome comparison of two Acinetobacter baumannii isolates from a single patient,


 2    where resistance developed during tigecycline therapy



 3    Michael Hornsey   1*, Nick Loman , David W. Wareham , Matthew J. Ellington , Mark J.3

            2                 4                       4                4                   5
 4    Pallen , Jane F. Turton , Anthony Underwood , Tom Gaulton , Claire P. Thomas , Michel

 5    Doumith , David M. Livermore and Neil Woodford     4


       1
 6      Centre for Immunology & Infectious Disease, Blizard Institute, Barts and The London, Queen

                                                                                          2
 7    Mary’s School of Medicine and Dentistry, 4 Newark Street, London, E1 2AT, UK; Centre for

 8    Systems Biology, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, B15 2TT, UK; Clinical Microbiology


 9    and Public Health Laboratory, Health Protection Agency, Addenbrooke’s Hospital, Hills Road,

                                    4
10    Cambridge, CB2 0QQ, UK; Health Protection Agency Centre for Infections, 61 Colindale

11    Avenue, London, NW9 5EQ, UK; Hammersmith Hospital, Imperial College Healthcare NHS


12    Trust, Du Cane Road, London, W12 0HS, UK


13    *Corresponding     author.   Tel:   +44-20-7882-2312;     Fax:   +44-20-7882-2181;      E-mail:


14    m.hornsey@qmul.ac.uk


      †
15     These authors contributed equally to this work.


16    Running title: Genome sequencing of A. baumannii from a patient treated with tigecycline



17    Keywords:      OXA-23 clone 1; glycylcycline resistance; comparative genomics



18


19

20


21
22    Objectives:  The whole genomes of two Acinetobacter baumannii isolates recovered from a


23    single patient were sequenced to gain insight into the nature and extent of genomic plasticity in

24    this important nosocomial pathogen over the course of a short infection. The first, AB210, was

25    recovered before tigecycline therapy and was susceptible to this agent; the second, AB211, was


26    recovered after therapy and was resistant.


27    Methods:     DNA from AB210 was sequenced by 454 GS FLX pyrosequencing according to

28    the standard protocol for whole-genome shotgun sequencing, producing ~250-bp fragment reads.


29    AB211 was shotgun-sequenced using the Illumina Genetic Analyzer to produce fragment reads

30    of exactly 36-bp. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and large deletions detected in

31    AB211 in relation to AB210 were confirmed by PCR and DNA sequencing.



32    Results:     Automated gene-prediction detected 3,850 putative coding sequences (CDS).

33    Sequence analysis demonstrated the presence of plasmids pAB0057 and pACICU2 in both

34    isolates. Eighteen putative SNPs were detected between the pre- and post-therapy isolates,


35    AB210 and AB211. Three contigs in AB210 were not covered by reads in AB211, representing

36    three deletions of approximately 15, 44 and 17 kb.


37    Conclusions: This study demonstrates that significant differences were detectable between two

38    bacterial isolates recovered one week apart from the same patient, and reveals the potential of


39    whole-genome sequencing as a tool for elucidating the processes responsible for changes in

40    antibiotic susceptibility profiles.


41



42
43    Introduction


44    Acinetobacter baumannii is an important nosocomial pathogen, with multidrug-resistant (MDR)

45    and even pan-drug-resistant strains reported world-wide. In the UK, carbapenem-resistant clonal


46    lineages limit available treatment options. One successful lineage, designated OXA-23 clone 1,

47    belonging to European clone II, has been recovered from over 60 hospitals, clustered mainly in

48    London and South-East England. Representative isolates of this clone are usually susceptible to


49    colistin and tigecycline only. We previously reported the emergence of tigecycline resistance

50    during antibiotic therapy in the OXA-23 clone 1 epidemic lineage, and showed that increased


51    expression of the resistance-nodulation-division (RND) efflux system, AdeABC was responsible

52    for the resistance phenotype.



53           The recent availability of rapid and inexpensive whole-genome sequencing permits

54    detailed investigation of genetic differences between pairs of bacterial isolates. In A. baumannii


55    whole-genome studies have thus far focused either on comparing distinct antibiotic-susceptible
                       4,5                                         6
56    and MDR strains,    or related isolates from different patients. The results of these and other

57    similar studies point to a high degree of genome plasticity, the rapid emergence of antibiotic


58    resistance, and considerable genetic variability even among closely-related isolates.


59           Tigecycline is used as a treatment of last resort for MDR A. baumannii infection, despite


60    a lack of formal trial data and the emergence of resistance is a major concern. We sequenced the

61    genomes of two A. baumannii isolates from a single patient, the first recovered before tigecycline


62    therapy and susceptible to this agent, the second after one week of therapy for an intra-abdominal

63    infection and resistant. The study aimed to gain insight into the nature and extent of genomic

64    plasticity over the course of a short infection.
65    Materials and Methods


66    Bacterial isolates

67    Clinical isolates AB210 and AB211 have been described previously. As OXA-23 clone 1


68    representatives, they belong to the globally successful European clone II group, and were

69    assigned to Group 1 by the multiplex PCR method described by Turton et al. They were typed

70    by PFGE of ApaI-digested genomic DNA (Figure 1), as described previously, and the presence

                                                   9
71    of blOXA-23-likes confirmed by multiplex PCR.



72    Antimicrobial susceptibility testing and DNA manipulations

73    MICs were determined by BSAC agar dilution or Etest (AB bioMérieux, Solna, Sweden) on


74    IsoSensitest agar (Oxiod, Basingstoke, UK) with the results interpreted according to BSAC

75    guidelines. Genomic DNA was extracted with the Wizard Genomic DNA Purification Kit

76    (Promega, Southampton, UK) and was used as template for DNA sequencing. Plasmids were


77    isolated from AB210 and AB211 using the PureYield Plasmid Miniprep System (Promega) and

78    analysed by agarose gel electrophoresis.



79    Whole-genome DNA sequencing and data analysis


80    DNA from AB210 was sequenced by 454 GS FLX pyrosequencing (Roche, Branford,

81    Connecticut, USA) according to the standard protocol for whole-genome shotgun sequencing,

82    producing ~250 bp fragment reads. AB211 was shotgun sequenced using the Illumina Genetic


83    Analyzer (Illumina, Saffron Walden, UK) to produce fragment reads of exactly 36-bp. All

84    sequencing was performed at GATC Biotech Ltd (Constance, Germany). A draft genome


85    assembly for AB210 was produced from flowgram data, using Newbler 2.5 (Roche). The

86    Newbler command-line option ‘-rip’ was used to ensure reads were aligned to single contigs
 87    only. The resulting contigs were annotated by reference to the related strain A. baumannii

              10
 88    ACICU    (also belonging to European clone II) using the automated annotation pipeline on the

 89    xBASE server. 11



 90           Illumina reads for isolate AB211 were mapped against the draft AB210 assembly using

 91    Bowtie 0.12.0.12For the purposes of single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) detection, Bowtie


 92    was run with parameter ‘-m 0’ to suppress alignments that map equally to multiple locations in

 93    the genome. To detect deletions this setting was not used. A consensus pileup was produced

                       13                                                  14
 94    using SAMtools,    and putative SNPs were called using Varscan 2.2     with the following

 95    parameters: minimum coverage (10), min-reads2 (2), min-avg-qual (15), min-var-freq (0.9). To


 96    detect microindels (insertion or deletion events) less than 3-bases long, AB211 reads were

 97    additionally mapped using Novoalign 2.5. 15 Whole-genome alignments were visualised and


 98    SNPs and deletions manually inspected using the output files from the above steps using

 99    BAMview.   16



100    Confirmation of SNPs and chromosomal deletions

101    SNPs and deletions detected in AB211 in relation to AB210 were confirmed by PCR and DNA


102    sequencing using the primers listed in Table S1. Nucleotide sequences of the resulting amplicons

103    were determined with an ABI 3730xl DNA analyser (Applied Biosystems, Warrington, UK).



104


105


106



107
108    Results & Discussion

109    Antibiotic susceptibilities


110    MICs of tigecycline, tobramycin, amikacin, gentamicin and azithromycin for the pre-therapy


111    isolate AB210 were 0.5, >32, >64, >32 and >256 mg/L, respectively, while MICs for the post-

112    therapy isolate AB211 were 16, 2, 4, 8 and >256 mg/L, respectively.



113    Sequencing results

114    Sequencing produced >128 million and >156 million sequence reads for AB210 and AB211,

115    respectively. The assembly of AB210 resulted in 91 contigs larger than 500-bp, comprising 4.06


116    megabases of sequence and representing a median 29-fold coverage. Automated gene-prediction

117    detected 3,850 putative coding sequences (CDS), of which 3,504 were homologous (defined as

118    BLASTP e-value ≤ 1e-05) to a sequence in the reference genome of A. baumannii ACICU. The


119    vast majority (96.6 %) of the AB211 reads mapped to a region on the AB210 genome. The

120    AB210 draft assembly has been deposited in GenBank (accession number: AEOX00000000) and


121    raw sequence reads for AB210 and AB211 have been submitted to NCBI’s Sequence Read

122    Archive under Study Accession Number SRP004860.


123    Plasmid profile


124    Plasmid profiles of AB210 and AB211 were identical and showed the presence of two plasmids

125    in each isolate (data not shown). Sequence analysis demonstrated the presence of a 9-kb contig in

                                                                                                5
126    AB210 which displayed 99.98 % identity to the previously characterised pAB0057 plasmid  .

127    This was seen at high sequence read coverage in both AB210 and AB211, suggesting it was

128    present as multiple copies. Three other contigs, totalling 65 kb, were seen at below-average
129    coverage; taken together these were a full match in length and nucleotide identity to the complete

130    pACICU2plasmid.   10



131    AB210 virulence genes and resistance islands


132    Resistance islands (RIs) have been detected in all sequenced A. baumannii genomes containing

133    multiple resistance determinants. They are composite transposons that are complex in nature and

                                                                  4
134    which have been designated AbaR (A. baumannii resistance). They share a common insertion

135    site (comM) but vary considerably among isolates in terms of the exact genetic composition, with


136    that from ACICU, a representative of European clone II being considerably reduced in size

137    compared to those found in representatives of European clone I.17Clinical isolates AB210 and


138    AB211 were found to contain an AbaR-type RI. In the former isolate (GenBank accession

139    number HQ700358) this was shown to contain sequence corresponding to nucleotides 587330-

140    599047 of strain AB0057 (GenBank accession number CP001182), with a 2.85 kb section


141    absent; this is an AbaR4-type island, and containsOXA-23


142


143    SNPs between AB210 and AB211



144    Eighteen putative SNPs were detected between the pre- and post-therapy isolates. Only one of

145    these was located outside of coding regions at -35 bp upstream of ureJ which encodes a


146    hydrogenase/urease accessory protein (AB210 locus tag: AB210-1_2203). The location of this

147    SNP suggests the possibility of regulatory significance although ureJ appears to be part of a

148    urease gene cluster which is co-transcribed as an operon in other species. Of the remaining 17,


149    eight were synonymous mutations whereas nine were non-synonymous including one missense

150    mutation (Table 1). Seventeen (94 %) of the SNPs were transitions. Eight of the nine non-
151    synonymous SNPs could be confirmed by PCR and sequencing while one was not validated

152    (Table 1 and Table S1). Several of these were located within genes predicted to be involved in


153    core biological functions, including translation (dusB), nucleic acid biosynthesis, α-ketoglutarate

154    and arabinose transport, environmental sensing (the signal transduction histidine kinase gene,

155    adeS which had previously been identified through a candidate-gene approach ), and signalling.


156    The mutation in adeS is believed to be responsible for up-regulation of the AdeABC efflux

157    system and hence tigecycline resistance. Two SNPs were located within a gene coding for a


158    GGDEF domain-containing protein, one of which was a non-synonymous mutation whilst the

159    other introduced an internal stop codon, thus giving rise to a truncated product (Table 1). These

160    proteins are enzymes that catalyze the synthesis of cyclic-di-GMP, which has been recognized


161    recently as an important second messenger in bacteria and is implicated in adhesin and

162    extrapolysaccharide biosynthesis.



163    Large structural changes in the genomes of AB210 and AB211

164    Three contigs in AB210 were not covered by reads in AB211, these putative deletions were


165    designated ROD1, 2 and 3. The first, ROD1, was approximately 15 kb in length. This deletion

166    disrupted the coding sequence of the DNA mismatch repair gene mutS (AB210-1_2445) by

167    eliminating the N-terminal mutS-I domain. Aside from encoding this mismatch recognition


168    enzyme, ROD1 also encoded a DMT superfamily permease (AB210-1_2447) and an MFS

169    permease (AB210-1_2451), transcriptional regulators (AB210-1_2450; AB210-1_2453), an EAL

                                                                                             19
170    domain-containing protein (AB210-1_2448), responsible for the degradation of cyclic-di-GMP.

171    At approximately 44 kb ROD2 was the largest deleted region and comprised of genes encoding

172    for transcriptional regulators (AB210-1_3253; AB210-1_3262; AB210-1_3269; AB210-


173    1_3273), ion channels and transporters (AB210-1_3254; AB210-1_3259; [AB210-1_3275;
174    AB210-1_3276; AB210-1_3277]), a class A β-lactamase enzyme (AB210-1_3248) and

                                                                            20
175    components of a type VI secretion system (AB210-1_3280; AB210-1_3281). Interestingly, part

176    of the type VI secretion locus was missing even in AB210, suggesting that this was a degenerate

177    system in both isolates. ROD1 and ROD2 are contiguous in A. baumannii ACICU, suggesting


178    this may be a single deletion, but this could not be confirmed experimentally for AB210 by PCR

179    (data not shown). ROD3, approximately 17 kb in length, included a class 1 integron containing

180    antibiotic resistance genes including macrolide resistance determinants (AB210-1_3691


181    [phosphotransferase]; AB210-1_3692 [an efflux protein]) and several genes encoding

182    aminoglycoside resistance determinants, namely aac(6')-Ib (AB210-1_3701), two copies of


183    aadA (AB210-1_3699; AB210-1_3700) and armA (AB210-1_3695), which encodes a 16S rRNA

184    methylase.


185


186    Implications for Acinetobacter evolution


187    The extent of genomic changes detected here are consistent with the marked changes in


188    phenotype, particularly the loss of aminoglycoside resistance in AB211. However, we were

189    unable to determine whether these changes were the result of rapid evolution during the course

190    of infection and treatment, or whether the patient initially had a mixed infection (or re-infection),


191    involving different variants of the same defined clone, with subsequent selection for tigecycline

192    resistance.


193          The disruption of mutS, an important DNA mismatch repair gene, is significant and


194    suggests the possibility of a hypermutator phenotype, which may have contributed to the

195    relatively large number of SNPs. Previous work in Acinetobacter sp. ADP1 has shown that mutS
196    preferentially recognises and repairs transitiso its disruption in AB211 is consistent with


197    our observation that 94 % of the SNPs belonged to this class.


198           The absence of ROD3 is consistent with the change in aminoglycoside resistance

199    between AB210 and AB211, with MICs of tobramycin, amikacin and gentamicin reduced at


200    least 8-fold in AB211. It is notable that the development of tigecycline resistance was

201    accompanied by increased susceptibility to other antibiotics through a large genomic deletion.


202           GGDEF and EAL-containing proteins have been implicated in sessile to planktonic


203    shifts. Taken together, the termination in a GGDEF domain-containing protein as well as the loss

204    of an EAL-domain containing protein in ROD1 may be advantageous during the process of

205    infection though this remains to experimentally determined.


206           In this study, whole-genome sequencing gave insight into the nature of genetic changes


207    between isolates under selection pressure through antibiotic therapy and a hostile host

208    environment. This study has demonstrated significant differences between two A. baumannii

209    isolates belonging to the same epidemic lineage, collected one week apart from the same patient.


210    Such studies are able to shed light on the relative importance of SNPs and transposon

211    mutagenesis on the evolution of A. baumannii and can generate hypotheses into the nature of

212    antibiotic resistance and virulence. Although further studies are needed to assess the extent of


213    genetic diversity among populations of A. baumannii in a single patient, we clearly demonstrated

214    the potential of whole-genome sequencing as an important tool for helping elucidate the

215    evolutionary processes responsible for the rapid development of antibiotic resistance in this


216    important nosocomial pathogen.


217
218    Acknowledgements



219    We wish to thank Anthony Haines, University of Birmingham for advice on bioinformatic

220    analysis.


221    Funding


222    This work was supported by an educational grant from Wyeth, now taken over by Pfizer.



223


224    Transparency Declarations


225    D. M. L. has (i) received research grants from Wyeth and Pfizer, (ii) spoken at meetings


226    organised by Wyeth and Pfizer, (iii) received sponsorship to travel to congresses from Wyeth

227    and Pfizer, as well as from numerous other pharmaceutical and diagnostic companies. He holds

228    shares in GlaxoSmithKline, Merck, AstraZeneca, Dechra and Pfizer; he acts also as Enduring


229    Attorney for a close relative, managing further holdings in GlaxoSmithKline and EcoAnimal

230    Health. N. W. has received research grants from Wyeth. M. E., M. D., J. F. T., A. U., T. G., D.

231    M. L. and N. W. are employees of the HPA and are influenced by its views on antibiotic use and


232    prescribing. M. H., D. W. W. and C. P. T. have received sponsorship to attend conferences from

233    Wyeth. N. L. and M. J. P. : none to declare.


234


235



236


237
238    References



239


240     1. Towner KJ. Acinetobacter: an old friend, but a new enemy. J Hosp Infect 2009; 73: 355-63.


241     2. Coelho JM, Turton JF, Kaufmann ME, et al. Occurrence of carbapenem-resistant


242         Acinetobacter baumannii clones at multiple hospitals in London and Southeast England. J

243         Clin Microbiol 2006; 44: 3623-7.


244     3. Hornsey M, Ellington MJ, Doumith M, et al. AdeABC-mediated efflux and tigecycline


245         MICs for epidemic clones of Acinetobacter baumannii. Journal of Antimicrobial

246         Chemotherapy 2010; 65: 1589-93.


247     4. Fournier PE, Vallenet D, Barbe V, et al. Comparative genomics of multidrug resistance in


248         Acinetobacter baumannii. PLoS Genet 2006; 2: e7.


249     5. Adams MD, Goglin K, Molyneaux N, et al. Comparative genome sequence analysis of

250         multidrug-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii. J Bacteriol 2008; 190: 8053-64.



251     6. Adams MD, Chan ER, Molyneaux ND, et al. Genomewide analysis of divergence of

252         antibiotic resistance determinants in closely related isolates of Acinetobacter baumannii.

253         Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2010; 54: 3569-77.



254     7. Adams MD, Nickel GC, Bajaksouzian S, et al. Resistance to colistin in Acinetobacter

255         baumannii associated with mutations in the PmrAB two-component system. Antimicrobial

256         Agents and Chemotherapy 2009; 53: 3628-34.
257     8. Turton JF, Gabriel SN, Valderrey C, et al. Use of sequence-based typing and multiplex


258         PCR to identify clonal lineages of outbreak strains of Acinetobacter baumannii. Clin

259         Microbiol Infect 2007; 13: 807-15.


260    9.   Andrews JM. BSAC standardized disc susceptibility testing method. Version 9.1, March


261         2010. http://www.bsac.org.uk/Resources/BSAC/Version_9.1_March_2010_final.pdf (22

262         March 2011, date last accessed).


263     10. Iacono M, Villa L, Fortini D, et al. Whole-genome pyrosequencing of an epidemic

264         multidrug-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii strain belonging to the European clone II

265         group. Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy 2008; 52: 2616-25.



266    11. Chaudhuri RR, Loman NJ, Snyder LA, et al. xBASE2: a comprehensive resource for

267         comparative bacterial genomics. Nucleic Acids Res 2008; 36: D543-D546.


268    12. Langmead B, Trapnell C, Pop M, et al. Ultrafast and memory-efficient alignment of short


269         DNA sequences to the human genome. Genome Biol 2009; 10: R25.


270    13. Li H, Handsaker B, Wysoker A, et al. The Sequence Alignment/Map format and

271         SAMtools. Bioinformatics 2009; 25: 2078-9.



272    14. Koboldt DC, Chen K, Wylie T, et al. VarScan: variant detection in massively parallel

273         sequencing of individual and pooled samples. Bioinformatics 2009; 25: 2283-5.


274    15. Krawitz P, Rodelsperger C, Jager M, et al. Microindel detection in short-read sequence


275         data. Bioinformatics 2010; 26: 722-9.
276    16. Carver T, Bohme U, Otto TD, et al. BamView: viewing mapped read alignment data in the


277         context of the reference sequence. Bioinformatics 2010; 26: 676-7.


278    17. Post V, White PA, Hall RM. Evolution of AbaR-type genomic resistance islands in

279         multiply  antibiotic-resistanAcinetobacter   baumannii.  Journal   of  Antimicrobial


280         Chemotherapy 2010; 65: 1162-70.


281    18. McMillan DJ, Mau M, Walker MJ. Characterisation of the urease gene cluster in


282         Bordetella bronchiseptica. Gene 1998; 208: 243-51.


283    19. Hengge R. Principles of c-di-GMP signalling in bacteria. Nat Rev Microbiol 2009; 7: 263-

284         73.



285    20. Bingle LE, Bailey CM, Pallen MJ. Type VI secretion: a beginner's guide. Curr Opin

286         Microbiol 2008; 11: 3-8.


287    21. Young DM, Ornston LN. Functions of the mismatch repair gene mutS from Acinetobacter


288         sp. strain ADP1. J Bacteriol 2001; 183: 6822-31.

289

290
Table 1.     Confirmed SNPs indentified in clinical isolate AB211 resulting in amino acid substitution or termination



       Position in                                                             Amino acid identity
 SNP   AB210       Locus tag in     Protein product                                               Orthologue
       assembly    AB210 assembly
                                                                              AB210      AB211

  1    159509      AB210-1_0138     tRNA-dihydrouridine synthase, DusB          A          T      ABAYE0965


  2    639321      AB210-1_0587     nucleoside-diphosphate-sugar epimerase      T          A      ACICU_01645

  3    755474      AB210-1_0703     major facilitator superfamily permease      V          A      ACICU_01760


  4    1469178     AB210-1_1405     hypothetical protein                        A          V      ACICU_02205


  5    2548057     AB210-1_2423     major facilitator superfamily permease      A          T      ACICU_01217


  6    2852737     AB210-1_2721     Signal transduction histidine kinase, AdeS  A          V      ACICU_01827


  7    3362158     AB210-1_3207     GGDEF domain-containing protein             Q          *      ACICU_03492

  8    3362175     AB210-1_3207     GGDEF domain-containing protein             G          V      ACICU_03492
               1 2 3




Figure 1.
Figure Legands



Figure 1.     PFGE profiles of AB210 (lane 2) and AB211 (lane 3).
Chapter 4


Open-Source Genomic Analysis

of Shiga-Toxin Producing E. coli
O104:H4



















                 80
                 The new england journal           ofmedicine




                                Brief Report




            Open-Source Genomic Analysis

   of Shiga-Toxin–ProducinggE. coli O104:H4


   Holger Rohde, M.D., Junjie Qin, Ph.D., Yujun Cui, Ph.D., Dongfang Li, M.E.,
  Nicholas J. Loman, M.B., B.S., Moritz Hentschke, M.D., Wentong Chen, B.S.,
         Fei Pu, B.S., Yangqing Peng, B.S., Junhua Li, B.E., Feng Xi, B.E.,

      Shenghui Li, B.S., Yin Li, B.S., Zhaoxi Zhang, B.S., Xianwei Yang, B.S.,
   Meiru Zhao, M.S., Peng Wang, B.M., Yuanlin Guan, B.E., Zhong Cen, M.E.,
         Xiangna Zhao, B.S., Martin Christner, M.D., Robin Kobbe, M.D.,

             Sebastian Loos, M.D., Jun Oh, M.D., Liang Yang, Ph.D.,
        Antoine Danchin, Ph.D., George F. Gao, Ph.D., Yajun Song, Ph.D.,
            Yingrui Li, B.S., Huanming Yang, Ph.D., Jian Wang, Ph.D.,

      Jianguo Xu, M.D., Ph.D., Mark J. Pallen, M.D., Ph.D, Jun Wang, Ph.D.,
               Martin Aepfelbacher, M.D., Ruifu Yang, M.D., Ph.D.,
     and the E. coli O104:H4 Genome Analysis Crowd-Sourcing Consortium*



                                   Summary

An outbreak caused by Shiga-toxin–producing Escherichia coli O104:H4 occurred in    The authors’ affiliations are listed in the
                                                                                    Appendix. Address reprint requests to Dr.
Germany in May and June of 2011, with more than 3000 persons infected. Here, we     Pallen at the Centre for Systems Biology,
report a cluster of cases associated with a single family and describe an open-sourcUniversityofBirmingham,B152TT,United
genomic analysis of an isolate from one member of the family. This analysis involvedKingdom, or at m.pallen@bham.ac.uk;
                                                                                    or to Dr. Yang at BGI-Shenzhen, Shen-
the use of rapid, bench-top DNA sequencing technology, open-source data release, andzhen 518083, China, or at the Beijing In-
prompt crowd-sourced analyses. In less than a week, these studies revealed that the stitute of Microbiology and Epidemiology,
outbreak strain belonged to an enteroaggregative E.coli lineage that had acquired genesDongda St., Beijing 100071, China, or
                                                                                    at yangruifu@genomics.org.cn.
for Shiga toxin 2 and for antibiotic resistance.
                                                                                    The following two groups of authors con-
                                                                                    tributedequallytothisarticle:Drs.Rohde,
                                                                                    Qin,Cui,D.Li,andLoman;andDrs.Pallen,
                                                                                    J. Wang, Aepfelbacher, and R. Yang.
      scherichia coli is a widespread commensal of the mammalian gut
      and a versatile pathogen.,2Enterovirulent strains of E.coli are classified into ambers of the E. coli O104:H4 Ge-
                                                                                     nome Analysis Crowd-Sourcing Con-
E     numberofoverlappingpathotypes,whichincludeShiga-toxin–producing, entero-       sortium are listed in the Supplementary
hemorrhagic, and enteroaggregative varieties. Enteroaggregative E. coli strains have Appendix, available at NEJM.org.
been associated with sporadic and epidemic diarrhea and, in the laboratory, show
                                                                                    Thisarticle(10.1056/NEJMoa1107643)was
a distinctive pattern of adherence to Hep-2 cells (termed aggregative, or “stacked  published on July 27, 2011, at NEJM.org.
brick”). In Shiga-toxin–producing E. coli, the toxin is encoded on a prophage and
inhibits protein synthesis within susceptible eukaryotic cells. Strains of enterohemor-ngl J Med 2011.
                                                                                    Copyright © 2011 Massachusetts Medical Society.
rhagic E.coli produce Shiga toxin and a specific protein secretion system (called a type
III secretion system) that is encoded by the locus of enterocyte effacement (LEE)
and that is responsible for attachment to the intestine. Shiga-toxin–producing and
enterohemorrhagicE.coli strains are commonly associated with the hemolytic–uremic

syndrome, a combination of renal impairment, thrombocytopenia, and hemolytic
anemia that is often accompanied by neurologic and myocardial damage.







                           10.1056/nejmoa1107643  nejm.org                                                         1

                                       The New England Journal of Medicine
             Downloaded from nejm.org on July 27, 2011. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.
                          Copyright © 2011 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.
                                            Thenew england journal            of medicine



                    More than 3000 cases of infection with an        platelets per cubic millimeter), and hemolytic ane-
                 unusual strain of Shiga-toxin–producing E. coli     mia (hemoglobin, 11.6 g per deciliter; bilirubin,
                 O104:H4 were reported to the Robert Koch Insti-     2.8 mg per deciliter [49 μmol per liter]; and lactate

                 tute in Berlin during a nationwide outbreak in      dehydrogenase, 2297 U per liter). His hemoglobin
                 Germany in May and June of 2011. This out- level fell to 8.4 g per deciliter within 48 hours after
                 break resulted in more than 40 deaths, and as-      admission, thereby fulfilling the case definition

                 sociated cases were reported in more than a         of the hemolytic–uremic syndrome.
                 dozen countries in Europe and North America            The children, their parents, and a teenage friend
                 (mostly in travelers returning from Germany).       had eaten a meal together a week earlier. The meal

                 Household transmission was described in the         included a freshly prepared salad containing bean
                 Netherlands, and life-threatening colonic ischemia  sprouts. The children’s mother had no symptoms,
                 was reported as a complication in addition to the   and no Shiga-toxin–producing E. coli was isolated

                 hemolytic–uremic syndrome and bloody diar-          from her stool. However, the hemolytic–uremic
                 rhea.5,6Epidemiologic and microbiologic evidence    syndrome developed in the father, and his stool
                 indicated that the O104:H4 strain was distributed   sample was culture-positive for Shiga-toxin–pro-
                                                         7
                 throughout Germany on bean sprouts.                 ducing E.coli. The teenage friend had diarrhea but
                    The outbreak was characterized by several un- was not admitted to the medical center.
                 usual features: a high incidence in adults (espe-      Stool samples from the siblings were plated

                 cially women), a greatly increased incidence of the on Sorbitol–MacConkey agar and incubated in a
                 hemolytic–uremic syndrome (in approximately liquid enrichment culture. The next day, super-
                 25% of patients, as compared with 1 to 15% in       natants from the liquid cultures tested positive for
                 previous outbreaks of Shiga-toxin–producing E. Shiga toxin on enzyme-linked immunosorbent

                 coli), a predominance of female patients among assay. Uniformly sorbitol-positive colonies were
                 cases of the hemolytic–uremic syndrome, and a       identified as E.coli on MALDI-TOF (matrix-assisted
                 rare serotype of Shiga-toxin–producing E.coli that laser desorption ionization–time of flight) mass

                 had been linked to only two sporadic cases of the spectrometry. Several single colonies were positive
                 hemolytic–uremic syndrome (one in Germany and for the stx2 gene and negative for the stx1 and eae
                 the other in South Korea).   4,8,9Recognition of genes on polymerase-chain-reaction (PCR) assay.

                 infection during the outbreak was hampered by a None of the isolates agglutinated with polyvalent
                 laboratory approach that targeted phenotypes as- serum samples directed against the serotypes that
                 sociated with the most common lineage of entero- are most frequently associated with Shiga-toxin–

                 hemorrhagic E. coli (the non–sorbitol-fermenting producing E.coli. Subsequent analyses showed that
                 O157:H7 serotype) rather than one aimed at find- the strain belonged to the rare serotype O104:H4
                 ing all strains of Shiga-toxin–producing E. coli.0  harboring an extended-spectrum beta-lactamase

                 Here, we report a local cluster of cases associated (ESBL) gene of the CTX-M-15 class.
                 with a family from northern Germany and de-            Although our 16-year-old patient had a mild
                 scribe an open-source genomic analysis of an course of disease without the hemolytic–uremic

                 isolate from the family cluster.                    syndrome and was discharged from the hospital
                                                                     on the same day, the clinical picture for her broth-
                                 Case Reports                        er was much less benign. The boy’s renal function,

                                                                     hemoglobin level, and thromobocytopenia im-
                 On May 17, 2011, a 16-year-old girl was admitted proved after 9 days of peritoneal dialysis, but severe
                 to the pediatric emergency ward at the University neurologic symptoms, including somnolence, vi-

                 Medical Center Hamburg–Eppendorf with bloody sual impairment, speech disturbances, hemiplegia,
                 diarrheaandabdominalpain.Herlaboratoryvalues and incontinence, developed. He underwent four
                 werenormal.Lateronthesameday,her12-year-old cycles of plasmapheresis and therapy with the
                 brother was admitted with a 2-day history of mal- anti–C5-antibody eculizumab. After this treat-

                 aise and headache and a 1-day history of vomiting ment, his clinical condition improved, and he was
                 and nonbloody diarrhea. The boy presented with discharged after 24 days with serum creatinine
                 acute renal failure (serum creatinine level, 4.1 mg levels just above the normal range. However, he

                 per deciliter [362 μmol per liter]; and potassium was left with neurologic sequelae and required
                 level, 6 mmol per liter), thrombocytopenia (22,000 rehabilitation.



2                                                     10.1056/nejmoa1107643  nejm.org

                                                The New England Journal of Medicine
                      Downloaded from nejm.org on July 27, 2011. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.
                                   Copyright © 2011 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.
                                            Brief Report


                                                     sion numbers SRA037315 for Ion Torrent reads and
         Methods and Results
                                                     SRA039136 for Illumina platform reads.
Open-Source Genomics
To investigate the evolutionary origins and patho-   Phylogenetic Analysis

genic potential of the outbreak strain, we set in The assembled Ion Torrent data provided gene se-
motion an open-source genomics program of re- quences that could be analyzed with an existing
search that incorporated new high-throughput se- multilocus-sequence-typing scheme for E.coli that

quencing approaches, public data release, and rapid relied on sequence comparisons for seven con-
outsourcing of analyses to bioinformaticians served housekeeping genes (adk, fumC, gyrB, mdh,
worldwide (crowd-sourcing) (Fig. 1). Initially, we purA,recA, and icd). This analysis revealed a close

sequenced the genome of the isolate from the relationship to a strain, 01-09591, which was iso-
16-year-oldgirl(TY2482),usingtheIonTorrentPer- lated in Germany in 2001 and which fell into se-

sonal Genome Machine (PGM), and obtained an quence type ST678. The TY2482 sequences differed
initial draft of the genome 3 days after receipt of from the profile of the 2001 strain by a single base
the DNA sample. Three DNA libraries were pre- pair in theadk gene and a single-base difference in

pared and seven sequencing runs performed, fol- a homopolymeric sequence in the recA gene. (We
lowing the protocols of the manufacturer (Life subsequently discovered that the latter difference
Technologies), to generate 79 Mb of sequence data, was a sequencing error generated by the PGM.) The

with an average read length of 101 bp. (For details 2001 strain, which produced Shiga toxin and was
regarding the sequencing procedures, see the Sup- associated with the hemolytic–uremic syndrome,
plementary Appendix, available with the full text fell into the O104:H4 serotype but did not have the

of this article at NEJM.org.)                        genes associated with type III secretion in typical
   We released these data into the public domain enterohemorrhagic E.coli.     13,1Additional scrutiny
under a Creative Commons 0 license, which elic- of the multilocus-sequence-typing database re-

ited a burst of crowd-sourced, curiosity-driven vealed that strains with the broad O104 serotype
analyses carried out by bioinformaticians on four were scattered across several sequence types,
           11
continents. Twenty-four hours after the release of whereas strains with the narrower O104:H4 sero-
the genome, it had been assembled; 2 days after type appeared to be limited to ST678.       10
its dissemination, it had been assigned to an ex-       Comparisons of the TY2482 genome with all

isting sequence type. Five days after the release of previously sequenced complete genomes of E.coli
the sequence data, we had designed and released isolates revealed a very close relationship to E.coli
strain-specific diagnostic primer sequences, and strain 55989, with an average nucleotide identity

within a week, two dozen reports had been filed of 99.8% (see the Supplementary Appendix). This
on an open-source wiki (a Web site that facilitates strain was isolated in the Central African Repub-
collaborative effort) dedicated to analysis of the lic from a stool sample obtained from an adult

strain. These analyses provided timely information with human immunodeficiency virus infection
on the strain’s virulence and resistance genes, in who had persistent watery diarrhea. It has been
addition to its phylogenetic lineage.                classified as an enteroaggregative E.coli, but unlike

   We also performed sequencing on the Illumina TY2482, it does not have Shiga toxin genes. How-5
HiSeq platform in accordance with the manufac- ever, it is worth noting that Mossoro et al., who15

turer’s instructions. An initial single-end run was first described E.coli strain 55989, also described
used to correct errors in the Ion Torrent sequence, strains of enteroaggregative E. coli with Shiga
principally in homopolymeric tracts. We later per- toxin genes in the same human population.       15

formed paired-end and mate-pair sequencing on
this platform, exploiting libraries with insert sizesComparison of the Chromosomes of TY2482
of 470 bp, 2 kb, and 6 kb, and generated enough      and 55989

data (1 Gb, 576 Mb, and 576 Mb from each library, Isolates from the German outbreak were initially
respectively) to create a high-quality draft genome described as enterohemorrhagic E. coli. However,
sequence within 2 weeks after receipt of the DNA the close relationship between TY2482 and 55989

samples. (Additional details are provided in the led us to consider the likelihood that TY2482 is an
Supplementary Appendix.) The reads were depos- enteroaggregative E.coli. Our analysis of the gene
ited in GenBank’s Short Read Archive with acces- content of TY2482 showed that it, like 01-09591,



                                     10.1056/nejmoa1107643  nejm.org                                                   3

                                        The New England Journal of Medicine
              Downloaded from nejm.org on July 27, 2011. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.
                            Copyright © 2011 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.
                                                The new england journal               of medicine






                                   May May 28  y 2a9y 30nJeunJeunJenJeunJeunJeunJenJeunJeunJen0JenJeunJen3Jen4Jene 16



                         Third GS        PGM

                                         500P‹ Œibrary     Single end     Pair end
                        Second GS
                                                    2‡…b and 6‡…b Mate‡plair library


                          First GS                                                                 PCR validation

                                        Dra€t genome                       ‚ine mapƒ                          †ear‡complete map
                                        Multilocus sequence                version 1„0                        ˆngoing analysis anld
                                          typing                                        ‚ine mapƒ version 2l„0  genome €inis‰ing
                                        P‰ylogeny constructilon            Annotation   Šdenti€ication o€
                                        Gene identi€icationl    Diagnostic …it            insertion o€ stx2‡
                                                                                          bearing p‰age

                                             Sample received        Sequencing          Assembly and analysisl



                     Figure 1. Timeline of the Open-Source Genomics Program.

                     After receiving the first batch of DNA samples on May 28, 2011, sequencing runs with the use of the Ion Torrent
                     Personal Genome Machine (PGM) and Illumina (small-insert library) were initiated simultaneously. On May 31, the
                     second batch of DNA was received and used for Illumina large-insert sequencing. An assembly of the Ion Torrent
                     reads was released on June 2, which enabled subsequent analyses (multilocus sequence typing, phylogenetic analysis,
                     and genome comparisons). Errors in the Ion Torrent data were corrected with the use of later Illumina data, and a

                     high-quality draft genome sequence was created. GS denotes generation of sequencing technology. The symbols at
                     May 28 and May 31 in the timeline indicate the arrival of DNA samples.



                   lacked the LEE and genes encoding effectors as- Sakai, is inserted into the wrbA locus. The stx2

                   sociatedwithtypeIIIsecretion. Instead,wefound genes differ by only one single-nucleotide polymor-
                   that the TY2482 genome encodes virulence factors phism from the stx2 allele seen in O157 enterohe-

                   that are typical of enteroaggregative E.coli. Other morrhagic E. coli strain EDL933.
                   investigators working on the outbreak strain have

                   also observed genes typically found in enteroag-         TY2482 Plasmids
                   gregative strains on PCR assay and have noted a From our de novo assembly (i.e., assembly without

                   behavioral phenotype that is characteristic of this the use of a reference genome), we concluded that
                   pathotype on cell-adherence assay.    17                 the TY2482 genome contains two large conjuga-

                      To identify strain-specific genes, we performed tive plasmids, pESBL TY2482 and pAA TY2482,
                   a detailed comparison of the chromosomes of andasmallplasmid,pG2011TY2482(Fig.2).From

                   TY2482 and enteroaggregative E.coli strain 55989. scrutinyofcopynumbersofsequencereads, it was
                   First, we aligned the TY2482 assembly against the clear that the two large plasmids were replicating

                   55989 chromosome (for details, see the Supple- at an approximate ratio of 1:1 with the chromo-
                   mentary Appendix). We then adopted the gene some, whereas the small plasmid was maintained

                   predictions and annotation from the 55989 ge- at a copy number at least nine times that of the
                   nome for these conserved sequences. Next, we other replicons. No phenotype could be ascribed

                   identified several isolate-specific regions of differ- to the small plasmid.
                   ence (i.e., regions present in the TY2482 chromo-            The largest plasmid, pESBL TY2482, was an IncI

                   some and absent from the 55989 genome or vice plasmid similar to pEC_Bactec, which was found
                   versa) that were more than 5 kb (Table 1 and Fig. in an E. coli strain isolated from the joint of a
                                                                                                    18
                   2, and the Supplementary Appendix). TY2482- horse with arthritis.                   The pESBL TY2482 plas-
                   specific regions of difference included prophage mid encodes a CTX-M-15 ESBL, as well as a beta-

                   remnants or apparently intact prophages, such as lactamase from the TEM class. The second large
                   the stx2 prophage, which, like its close relatives plasmid, pAA TY2482, resembled a plasmid from

                   in the genomes of O157:H7 strains EDL933 and strain 55989 but carried a gene cluster encoding a

4
                                                           10.1056/nejmoa1107643  nejm.org
                                                    The New England Journal of Medicine

                        Downloaded from nejm.org on July 27, 2011. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.
                                       Copyright © 2011 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.
                                              Brief Report




  Table 1. Genetic Elements in Strain TY2482 of Shiga-Toxin–ProducicngEscherichia coli O104:H4.

  Genetic Element                  Notable Features or Functions            Size or 55989 Coordinates*

  Plasmid

  pESBL TY2482            IncI1 plasmid, homologous to pEC_Bactec carrying            88 kb
                                            bla CTX-M-15
  pAA TY2482              Plasmid encoding aggregative adherence fimbriae I           76 kb

  pG2011 TY2482                 Plasmid with no obvious phenotype                     1.5 kb

  Region of difference

  I-ROD1                               Degenerate prophage                      296227 (tRNA-Thr)

  I-ROD2                             Stx2-encoding prophage                      1176265 (wrbA)
  I-ROD3                 Microcin gene cluster; tellurite resistance gene cluste1207704 (tRNA-Ser)

  I-ROD4                                    Prophage                              1811905 (ynfG)

  I-ROD5                                    Prophage                              2102453 (yecE)

  I-ROD6                       Molybdate metabolism regulator; yehL               2426442 (IS1)
  I-ROD7                   Multidrug-resistantP gene cluster (dfA7, suII, suIII,4211244 (tRNA-Sec)

                                  strA, strB, tetA); mercury resistance
  D-ROD1                                    Prophage                            1094587–1140306

  D-ROD2                                    Prophage                            1413924–1446834

  D-ROD3                                    Prophage                            1754689–1800354

  D-ROD4                                    Prophage                            2688656–2701228
  D-ROD5                              Type VI secretion genes                   3401720–3427357

  D-ROD6                                    Prophage                            4944269–5004333


* Coordinates from the genome of E. coli strain 55989 are given for predicted boundaries of regions of difference, with
  the gene carrying the insertion site shown in parentheses for a region of difference involving an insertion into 55989
  (I-ROD). D-ROD denotes a region of difference involving a deletion.



rare type of aggregative adherence fimbria (AAF/I) an O104:H4 strain associated with the hemolytic–

instead of the more common type (AAF/III) en- uremic syndrome in Korea in 2005 is unexplained,
coded by genes in the 55989 plasmid. We ex- and its link to the German outbreak is unclear.               9

ploited this AAF/I cluster as a target for strain- Also, the O104:H4 strain 01-09591 that was iso-
specific PCR primers as part of a suite of primers lated in Germany in 2001 urgently requires further

to identify the outbreak isolate.                      investigation. Both strains should undergo ge-
                                                       nome sequencing and comparison with TY2482.

                  Discussion                           The link to strain 55989, which was isolated in
                                                       the Central African Republic in the late 1990s, is

Our genomic analyses suggest that the German also intriguing. Genome sequencing of additional

outbreak strain evolved from a progenitor that Central African isolates from the study that yielded
belonged to the enteroaggregative pathotype and 55989 is likely to illuminate the evolution of this

resembled strain 55989. The emergence of the lineage and of enterovirulent E.coli in general (see
outbreak strain depended on the acquisition of a the article by Rasko et al. elsewhere in this issue
                                                                     19
stx2 prophage and of a plasmid encoding a CTX- of the Journal ).
M-15 ESBL. Sometime during this process, the              Although the genome sequence alone cannot

strain also appears to have lost one gene cluster, provide a full explanation for the high degree of
encoding AAF/III fimbriae, and gained another, virulence of this strain, it prompts a reassessment

encoding the rarer AAF/I fimbriae.                     of our assumptions and provides a framework for
   Although this outbreak strain has surprised future hypothesis-driven research. Both commen-

the general public and public health officials, re- sal and pathogenic varieties of E.coli have to survive
lated potential progenitor strains have been re- in the gut. However, mere survival, even if twinned

ported from three continents. The appearance of with the production of Shiga toxin, is probably


                                      10.1056/nejmoa1107643  nejm.org                                                       5

                                          The New England Journal of Medicine
               Downloaded from nejm.org on July 27, 2011. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.
                             Copyright © 2011 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.
                                                    The new england journal                 of medicine






                                                                                            I-ROD1 prophage redmnant




                                                                 D-ROD6



                                I-ROD7 drug
                                 resistance                              5000
                                                                          kb
                                                                  4500              5kb                         I-ROD2 stx2 phage
                                                                   kb

                                                                                         1000        D-ROD1
                                                              4000                        kb
                                                               kb      TY2482 versus
                                                                     55989 chromosome
                                                                                          1500                   I-ROD3 Tell-R
                                                                                          kb          D-ROD2    and microcidins
                                                               3kb0

                                                                                    2000
                                                 D-ROD5               3kb0   2500    kb           D-ROD3
                                                                              kb



                                                                                                            I-ROD4 prophage
                                                                        D-ROD4


                                                                                                   I-ROD5 prophage


                                                                                      I-ROD6 molybdate
                                                                                    metabolism regulatodr



                      Figure 2. Comparison of the TY2482 and 55989 Genomes.
                      The outer circle depicts the Escherichia coli 55989 chromosome. The inner circle represents the TY2482 assembly

                      mapped against the 55989 chromosome. Regions of difference (ROD) that are present in 55989 but not TY2482
                      (D-RODs) are shown as gaps in the inner circle. The positions of RODs that were found in TY2482 but not 55989

                      (I-RODs) are shown as wedges on the outer circle at positions corresponding to the predicted insertion sites. Tell-R
                      denotes tellurite resistance.



                                                                                                  21
                    not enough to cause the hemolytic–uremic syn-                 one outbreak      that affected more than 2000 per-
                    drome or bloody diarrhea. For that, the bacteria sons in Japan in 1993. Thus, there is clearly an

                    would probably need to adhere to the gut mucosa. urgent need to understand how the German out-

                    In the past, much research has been concentrated break strain and other strains of enteroaggregative

                    on the adhesion systems of typical enterohemor- E.coli adhere to and colonize seeds and seedlings.
                    rhagic E.coli, particularly the LEE-encoded type III              Our rapid open-source analysis of an outbreak-

                    secretion system.   16,20This German outbreak strain associated bacterial pathogen was characterized

                    shows us that Shiga-toxin–producing E. coli can by a propitious confluence of high-throughput

                    exploit alternative adhesion mechanisms, very like- genomics, crowd-sourced analyses, and a liberal
                    ly including aggregative adherence fimbriae, to the approach to data release. Although phenotypic or

                    same end. This strain also shows that pathotypes molecular analyses that exploit known virulence,

                    of E. coli can overlap and that they evolve rather resistance, or epidemiologic targets are useful in
                    than stand as fixed archetypes.                               diagnostic and public health microbiology, ge-

                        It remains unclear why this strain has proved to nome sequencing offers the advantages of open-

                    be so virulent. As noted, a novel suite of adhesins endedness(revealingthe“unknownunknowns”),

                    might provide an explanation. Alternatively, per- universal applicability, and the ultimate in reso-
                    haps this strain exploits more efficient mecha- lution. Our study shows how benchtop sequenc-

                    nisms for toxin release. It is worth remembering ing platforms can generate data with sufficient

                    that strains of enteroaggregative E.coli have caused speed to have an important effect on clinical and
                    large sprout-associated outbreaks before, including epidemiologic problems.




6                                                               10.1056/nejmoa1107643  nejm.org


                                                        The New England Journal of Medicine
                          Downloaded from nejm.org on July 27, 2011. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.
                                         Copyright © 2011 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.
                                                        Brief Report




   Supported by grants from the State Key Development Program      cal Faculty of the University Medical Center Hamburg–Eppendorf,
for Basic Research of China (2009CB522600), the National Key       and the British Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research
Program for Infectious Diseases of China (2008ZX10004-009),        Council (BB/E011179/1).

Shenzhen Biological Industry Development Special Foundation–          Disclosure forms provided by the authors are available with
Basic Research Key Projects (JC201005250088A), Key Laboratory      the full text of this article at NEJM.org.
Project Supported by Shenzhen City (ZD200806180054A), the Euro-       We thank David Vallenet, Claudine Médigue, Xiaoning Wang,
peanUnionMicromeProgram(FP7-KBBE-2007-3-2-08-222886),the           and Jennifer Gardy for their helpful discussions.

Alexander von Humboldt Foundation (to Dr. L. Yang), the Medi-



                                                             Appendix
  The authors’ affiliations are as follows: the Institute of Medical Microbiology, Virology and Hygiene (H.R., M.H., M.C., L.Y., M.A.)
and the Department of Pediatrics (R.K., S. Loos, J.O.), University Medical Center Hamburg–Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany; BGI-

Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China (J.Q., Y.C., D.L., W.C., F.P., Y.P., J.L., F.X., S. Li, Yin Li, Z.Z., Z.C., Yingrui Li, H.Y., Jian Wang, Jun Wang,
R.Y.), and the School of Bioscience and Biotechnology, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China (J.L.); the State Key
Laboratory of Pathogen and Biosecurity, Beijing Institute of Microbiology and Epidemiology (Y.C., X.Z., Y.S., R.Y.), CAS Key Labora-

tory of Pathogenic Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Science (G.F.G.), and the State Key
Laboratory for Infectious Disease Prevention and Control and National Institute for Communicable Diseases Control and Prevention,
Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention (G.F.G., J.X.) — all in Beijing; the Centre for Systems Biology, University of Birming-

ham, Birmingham, United Kingdom (N.J.L. M.J.P.); and AMAbiotics, Evry, France (A.D.).


References

1.  Hobman JL, Penn CW, Pallen MJ. Lab-      producing Escherichia coli O104:H4 strain    rican Republic. J Clin Microbiol 2002;40:
oratory strains of Escherichia coli: model   causing the outbreak of haemolytic urae-     3086-8.
citizens or deceitful delinquents growing    mic syndrome in Germany, May to June         16. Tobe T, Beatson SA, Taniguchi H, et

old disgracefully? Mol Microbiol 2007;       2011. Euro Surveill 2011;16:pii:19889.       al. An extensive repertoire of type III se-
64:881-5.                                    9.  Bae WK, Lee YK, Cho MS, et al. A case    cretion effectors in Escherichia coli O157
2.  Kaper JB, Nataro JP, Mobley HL.          of hemolytic uremic syndrome caused by       and the role of lambdoid phages in their

Pathogenic Escherichia coli. Nat Rev Mi-     Escherichia coli O104:H4. Yonsei Med J       dissemination. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
crobiol 2004;2:123-40.                       2006;47:437-9.                               2006;103:14941-6.
3.  Weintraub A. Enteroaggregative Esch-     10. Chattaway MA, Dallman T, Okeke IN,       17. Bielaszewska M, Mellmann A, Zhang

erichia coli: epidemiology, virulence and    Wain J. Enteroaggregative E. coli O104       W, et al. Characterisation of the Esche-
detection. J Med Microbiol 2007;56:4-8.      from an outbreak of HUS in Germany           richia coli strain associated with an out-
4.  Frank C, Werber D, Cramer JP, et al.     2011, could it happen again? J Infect Dev    break of haemolytic uraemic syndrome in
Epidemic profile of Shiga-toxin–produc-      Ctries 2011;5:425-36.                        Germany, 2011: a microbiological study.

ing Escherichia coli O104:H4 outbreak in     11. GitHub. E. coli O104:H4 genome anal-     Lancet Infect Dis 2011 June 22 (Epub
Germany — preliminary report. N Engl J       ysis crowd sourcing, 2011. (https://github   ahead of print).
Med 2011. DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1106483.        .com/ehec-outbreak-crowdsourced/             18. Smet A, Van Nieuwerburgh FV, Vande-

5.  Kuijper E, Soonawala D, Vermont C,       BGI-data-analysis/wiki.)                     kerckhove TTM, et al. Complete nucleo-
van Dissel J. Household transmission of      12. University College Cork. Escherichiacoli tide sequence of CTX-M-15-plasmids from
haemolytic uraemic syndrome associated       MLST Database, 2011. (http://mlst.ucc.ie/    clinical Escherichia coli isolates: inser-

with Escherichia coli O104:H4 in the         mlst/dbs/Ecoli.)                             tional events of transposons and insertion
Netherlands. Euro Surveill 2011;16:pii:      13. Mellmann A, Bielaszewska M, Kock R,      sequences. PLoS ONE 2010;5(6):e11202.
19897.                                       et al. Analysis of collection of hemolytic   19. Rasko DA, Webster DR, Sahl JW, et al.
6.  Cordesmeyer S, Peitz U, Godde N,         uremic syndrome-associated enterohem-        Origins of the E.coli strain causing an out-

Kasper H, Hoffmann M, Allemeyer E. Co-       orrhagic Escherichia coli. Emerg Infect      break of hemolytic–uremic syndrome in
lonic ischaemia as a severe Shiga toxin/     Dis 2008;14:1287-90.                         Germany.NEnglJMed2011.DOI:10.1056/
verotoxin   producing   Escherichia   coli   14. Creuzburg K, Middendorf B, Mellmann      NEJMoa1106920.

O104:H4 complication in a patient with-      A, et al. Evolutionary analysis and distri-  20. Schmidt MA. LEEways: tales of EPEC,
out haemolytic uraemic syndrome, Ger-        bution of type III effector genes in patho-  ATEC and EHEC. Cell Microbiol 2010;12:
many, June 2011. Euro Surveill 2011;16:      genic Escherichia coli from human, ani-      1544-52.

pii:19895.                                   mal and food sources. Environ Microbiol      21. Itoh Y, Nagano I, Kunishima M, Ezaki
7.  Robert Koch Institute. Information up-   2011;13:439-52.                              T. Laboratory investigation of enteroaggre-
date on EHEC/HUS outbreak, 2011. (http://    15. Mossoro C, Glaziou P, Yassibanda S,      gative Escherichia coli O untypeable:H10
www.rki.de/nn_217400/EN/Home/                et al. Chronic diarrhea, hemorrhagic coli-   associated with a massive outbreak of

PM082011.html.)                              tis, and hemolytic-uremic syndrome as-       gastrointestinal illness. J Clin Microbiol
8.  Scheutz F, Moller Nielsen E, Frimodt-    sociated with HEp-2 adherent Escherichia     1997;35:2546-50.
Moller J, et al. Characteristics of the en-  coli in adults infected with human immu-     Copyright © 2011 Massachusetts Medical Society.

teroaggregative   Shiga   toxin/verotoxin-   nodeficiency virus in Bangui, Central Af-















                                               10.1056/nejmoa1107643  nejm.org                                                                           7

                                                    The New England Journal of Medicine

                  Downloaded from nejm.org on July 27, 2011. For personal use only. No other uses without permission.
                                   Copyright © 2011 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.
Supplementary Appendix: Open-source genomics of a Shiga-toxin-producing


Escherichia coli O104:H4


Crowd-sourcing consortium


The following members of the E. coli O104:H4 Genome Analysis Crowd-sourcing

consortium made contributions that influenced the analyses reported here: Kathryn E. Holt,


David J. Studholme, Michael Feldgarden and Marina Manrique.


A full account of crowd-sourcing efforts can be accessed here: https://github.com/ehec-

outbreak-crowdsourced/BGI-data-analysis/wiki/


Methods and Results



Ion Torrent library construction and sequencing


Genomic DNA was extracted and purified using a conventional SDS lysis and phenol-

chloroform method. 5µg of DNA (OD260/OD280 = 1.85) was dissolved in TE buffer to a


total volume of 100 µl and fragmented by sonication (Covaris S2, Massachusetts, USA) to a

size distribution of 50-300 bp. Library preparation and template preparation of live Ion

Sphere™ Particles was performed according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Ion Torrent,


USA). During the library preparation, nick-translation was followed by 5 cycles of PCR

amplification. Finally the sequencing was performed on the PGM Sequencer. Seven 314

chips were run to generate 79.1 Mb of sequence, with average length of 101 bp.


Illumina library construction and sequencing



Whole-genome sequencing was performed using Illumina HiSeq 2000 (Illumina Inc. U.S.A)

by generating paired-end libraries with an average insert size of 470 bp, 2 kbp and 6 kbp





                                             1
following the manufacturer’s instruction. The read lengths were 90bp, 50bp, 50bp and 1Gb,

576Mb and 576Mb high quality data were generated from each library respectively.



Creation of a draft genome assembly using Ion Torrent PGM data (2nd June 2011)


An assembly was performed using MIRA 3.2.1.17_dev using command-line parameters --

job=denovo,genome,accurate,iontor -GE:not=1. The Ion Torrent PGM assembly from 5


chips of Ion Torrent 314 data produced an assembly of 3,057 contigs, total bases: 5,491,032

with an N50 value of 3,675.


Creation of a hybrid assembly using Ion Torrent PGM data and Illumina single-end data (6th

June 2011)


Ion Torrent and Illumina read data were quality filtered before assembly including removal of


adapter contamination. The Ion Torrent PGM assembly from 7 chips of Ion Torrent 314 data

were assembled with Newbler 2.0.00.22. Illumina single-end data (taken from the in-progress

                                                         1
paired-end run) were assembled using SOAPdenovo 1.06 (with k-mer of 51 and parameters

"-d 1, -R". Assemblies were combined using AMOS minimus2 1.59 with parameters

REFCOUNT=0, OVERLAP=50, MINID=94, MAXTRIM=10 . The resulting assembly


consisted of 451 contigs greater than 200bp with an N50 of 53266bp. The largest contig was

204342bp.



Creation of a draft genome scaffold assembly using Illumina paired-end and mate-pair reads


A draft de novo assembly was produced using SOAPdenovo version 1.05. Contigs were first

assembled using the 470bp paired-end library initially using a k-mer value of 45 for de Bruijn


graph construction. These were subsequently scaffolded in a hierarchical fashion using 2kb

followed by 6kb mate-pair libraries by way of the rank parameter in the SOAPdenovo


configuration file. Other parameters supplied to SOAPdenovo included -F to attempt to fill



                                              2
gaps in scaffolds. Where possible, in order to fill remaining scaffold gaps, local information


available from the abundant mate-pair data was utilised by the GapCloser utility which was

run over the assembly output with a k-mer size of 23. Both scaffolds and un-scaffolded


contigs were used in further analysis, with the exception of contigs smaller than 200bp which

were excluded.


De novo assembly produced 24 scaffolds plus 75 un-scaffolded contigs. The largest scaffold


was 757969bp, the smallest was 552bp. Scaffold N50 was 403980bp. After gap filling the

scaffolds contained 143 distinct stretches of gaps (represented as ambiguous 'N' bases)

comprising 94491bp of sequence.



Insert sizes


The estimated insert size with standard deviations predicted by SOAPdenovo are

demonstrated in Table S1.


Table S1. The estimated insert size determined by the de novo assembly process.



Library           Estimated insert size             Standard deviation

470bp             468                               31

2kb               2548                              246


6kb               6193                              566




Determination of closest reference by average nucleotide identity (ANI)



Average nucleotide identity with all complete E. coli genomes available in GenBank was

calculated using the ANIb algorithm which uses BLAST as the underlying alignment

method . Scrutiny of results (Table S2) revealed that E. coli 55989 showed the highest


nucleotide identity with an ANI of 99.8% between the TY2482 draft chromosome and E. coli

                                            3
55989. The ANIb algorithm shreds sequences into 1kb segments. BLAST alignments needed


to be longer than 700bp and have >70% nucleotide identity to count towards ANIb

calculation. ANIb parameters to BLAST were "-F F -e 0.001 -v 1 -b 1 -X 150 -q -1".


Table S2. Average nucleotide identities for TY2482 compared against all complete E.


coli genomes


                   TY2482 vs                        ANIb
Escherichia coli 55989                               99.84
Escherichia coli IAI1                                 99.2

Escherichia coli W                                   99.14
Escherichia coli E24377A                             99.09
Escherichia coli SE11                                99.09

Escherichia coli O103:H2 str. 12009                  98.95
Escherichia coli O26:H11 str. 11368                  98.98
Escherichia coli O111:H- str. 11128                  98.85
Escherichia coli HS                                  98.67

Escherichia coli ATCC 8739                           98.55
Escherichia coli str. K-12 substr. W3110             98.54
Escherichia coli str. K-12 substr. MG1655            98.54

Escherichia coli DH1                                 98.54
Escherichia coli BL21-Gold(DE3)plyss AG              98.53
Escherichia coli BL21(DE3)                           98.53

Escherichia coli BL21(DE3)                           98.53
Escherichia coli B str. REL606                       98.53
Escherichia coli BW2952                              98.49

Escherichia coli str. K-12 substr. DH10B              98.5
Escherichia coli H10407                               98.5
Escherichia coli ETEC H10407                          98.5

Escherichia coli O55:H7 str. CB9615                  97.92
Escherichia coli O157:H7 str. TW14359                97.86
Escherichia coli O157:H7 str. Sakai                  97.87

Escherichia coli O157:H7 str. EC4115                 97.86
Escherichia coli O157:H7 str. EDL933                 97.82
Escherichia coli 042                                 97.45
Escherichia coli UMN026                              97.39

Escherichia coli IAI39                                97.3
Escherichia coli SMS-3-5                             97.21
Escherichia coli SE15                                97.06

Escherichia coli CFT073                              97.02
Escherichia coli S88                                 96.97


                                            4
Escherichia coli O83:H1 str. NRG 857C                   96.99
Escherichia coli O127:H6 str. E2348/69                  96.95

Escherichia coli UM146                                  96.94
Escherichia coli 536                                    96.95

Escherichia coli UTI89                                  96.93
Escherichia coli APEC O1                                96.98
Escherichia coli ED1a                                   96.82




Annotation of putative regions of difference between TY2482 and 59989


The TY2482 scaffold assembly was aligned against E. coli 55989 using progressiveMauve      5


(part of Mauve 2.3.1) using default settings. For ease of viewing, scaffolds were moved and

where necessary reverse complemented to fit the order of the E. coli 55989 chromosome


using the Mauve contig mover, again run with default parameters. Unaligned regions of the

TY2482 >= 5kb were examined as putative regions of difference. Gene prediction within

                                                 6
these regions was performed using Glimmer 3.02 using the g3-iterated.sh workflow with

default options. Genes with a raw score of >= 1.0 were extracted for further analysis. Due to

Glimmer mis-predictions when run on the plasmid sequences, plasmids pESBL and pAA

                                       7
instead used Heuristic GeneMark.hmm PROKARYOTIC (version 2.8a) for gene calling.

This was run with default settings and model file "heuristic_no_rbs.mat"


(http://opal.biology.gatech.edu/GeneMark/heuristic_hmm2.cgi). Putative protein products >=

50 aa in length were searched against the Genbank non-redundant protein database using


PHMMER using HMMER (http://hmmer.janelia.org/). Genome visualisation plots were

generated using CGview . 8



Manual inspection of scaffolds revealed each plasmid was contained within a single scaffold.

Manual curation of pG2011 demonstrated an ~1.5kb plasmid with >99% nucleotide identity

to E. coli strain H30 plasmid pO26-S1. This plasmid sequence was present as a 2-copy


tandem repeat in the assembly, likely an artefact of the mate-pair assembly process (as insert



                                              5
sizes longer than the plasmid were used) and has been manually edited to form a single copy.


The location of the plasmids in the assembly are as follows: pESBL-TY2482 = scaffold19,

pAA-TY2482 = scaffold16, pG2011 = scaffold21.


Accession numbers


The sequencing reads have been deposited into NCBI's Short Read Archive with accession


numbers SRR227300, SRR227337, SRR227338, SRR227339, SRR227340, SRR231653,

SRR231654 (Ion Torrent) and SRX079806 (Illumina mate-pair), SRX079805 (Illumina mate-

pair) , SRX079804 (Illumina paired-end).




The scaffolded assembly and annotation has been deposited to Genbank, accession number


AFVR00000000 (draft Illumina scaffold assembly), AFVS00000000 (Ion Torrent assembly)

and AFOG01000000 (hybrid Ion Torrent and Illumina single-end assembly).


References


1. Li R, Zhu H, Ruan J, et al. De novo assembly of human genomes with massively parallel


    short read sequencing. Genome Res 2010;20:265-72.

2. Sommer DD, Delcher AL, Salzberg SL, Pop M. Minimus: a fast, lightweight genome

    assembler. BMC Bioinformatics. 2007;8:64.


3. Goris J, Konstantinidis KT, Klappenbach JA, Coenye T, Vandamme P, Tiedje JM. DNA-

    DNA hybridization values and their relationship to whole-genome sequence similarities.

    Int J Syst Evol Microbiol 2007;57:81-91.


4. Richter M, Rossello-Mora R. Shifting the genomic gold standard for the prokaryotic

    species definition. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2009;106:19126-31.

5. Darling AE, Mau B, Perna NT. progressiveMauve: multiple genome alignment with gene


    gain, loss and rearrangement. PLoS One 2010;5:e11147.

                                             6
6. Delcher AL, Bratke KA, Powers EC, Salzberg SL. Identifying bacterial genes and


    endosymbiont DNA with Glimmer. Bioinformatics 2007;23:673-679

7. Besemer J, Borodovsky M. Heuristic approach to deriving models for gene finding.


    Nucleic Acids Res 1999;27:3911-20.

8. Stothard P, Wishart DS. Circular genome visualization and exploration using CGView.

    Bioinformatics 2005;21:537-9.
















































                                             7
        )                                                  8  5 5    9 8 8         0 0   9 9 9     0 5 1
        i                                                  3  4 4    0 3 3         5 5   0 0 0     5 4
        e                    1 1 1            1     3      . E.E 1.1 . 1.1  .      . E.1 . 1 . E.  . C .
        (      -             -  -  -          -     -      s  s   s  s  s   s      s  s  s   s  s  s   s
        h      8         0   7 7 7            7  0  7      1 7 7 2 1 1  1 1        7 7 2 2 2 7 7
        s          2     1   1 1 1            1  1  1   2  :  7 7 3  :  : H :  1   7 7 3 3 3 7 7:  :   :
        B      S   2  7  C   S S S     7 7    S  C  S   2 2 1 1 1 2 2          1   1 1 1 1 1 1 1
               i   i BiE i   i MiM i   i Bi   i  i  i   i OiO i O i OiB i O i OiO OiO i  i   i  i  i   i
               c c c c o o o c oc c c c co o o o c c c o o c c c o o c c c c c c   l  l  c c c c c l   l
               i a i ai  i   i  i aia aia i   i  i aia  i  i aia  i  i aia aia i   i  i  i a i aia i   i
               i c i cih i h i hi cic cichih hih i cic hih i cic hih i cic cic i   i  i  i c i cic i   i
               h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h e e e e e e   r  r  e e e e e r   r
               s c s cs  s   s  s csc csc s   s  s csc  s  s csc  s  s csc csc s   s  s  s c s csc s   s
               E E E E E E E E E E E E E E E E E E E E E E E E E E E

        d  o
        a  a
        u  o
        C  n
           a









                                                                                                            8

                                       e
                                       r
        )                              s
        R                              a
        t                              y
        h                          1   o      1     4
        e                          1   a      1     1
8       B                          0   -      0     2                                    6 5
2                  8     8         5   S  4   5  7  5         e         6 7              8 8
Y                  0     0         F   e 33   F  0  F         r   i     1 1        i ni  _ _           i
f                  G e   _         R   r  A   R  _  R         e o t     2 2        o ot  1 1           o
s              e   K  a  o   e neP     -  B   P  o  P         a   p     O O        p pr  O O           p
i              r   E  o  E   r or  H   i  E H E HC  M         p   c  r  E E        c cl  E E           c
s              p   i  r  i   p p   i   a  i n i ni  i         e   e  s  i n i      e et  i n i  a      e
l              a   r  2  r   a na  r   -  r o r or er   e     a   o  p  r o r      o ot  r o r  l      o
d              o   l  T  l   o o   l   l  l p l pl  l   r     l   y  i  l p l      y y   l p l  n  n   y
a              d   i  n  i   d d   i   a  i c i  i ci   t     i   d  a  i c i      d d   i c i  e  t   d
s              r   h  o  h r v vr  h   v  h h h he et   i  a  h r v  v  h h t      r vr  h h t  v  p   r
O              s   o  s  o   s  s  o   a  o o o ot  t   g  g  o   s  a  o o 3      s es  o o t  a  T   s
R              c h t  r  h c o oc h p h h h h p i       a  n  h c o  p h h g c c   o o   h h p R c e   o
h
n
s
n
g       I      0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
e       S      0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
a       C      o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o r  r   r  r   r  r  r   r  r  r   r
o              1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2
n              r o r oro r o r oro r o r oro oro r oro oro r oro oro r  r   r  r   r  r  r   r  r  r   r
A              i   i  i  i   i  i  i   i  i   i  i  i   i  i  i   i  i  i   i  i   i  i  i   i  i  i   i
.
S       I      1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2
l       D      O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O
a       O      - R - R-R - R - R-R - R - R-R R-R - R-R R-R - R-R R-R -  -   -  -   -  -  -   -  -  -   -
T       R      I   I  I  I   I  I  I   I  I   I  I  I   I  I  I   I  I  I   I  I   I  I  I   I  I  I   I
          5   8 8                                                      8
5 5 5     C   4 4   5      5      9                   i   1 5          4         1                    i  9
4 4 4     .   1 1   4      4      0                   k   4 4   7      1         4                    k 00
. E.E  .  s   . T.  .      .      .                   . E . C.  _      .         .                    . 1.
s  s   s  7   s  s  s      s      s      8            s   s  s  p      s         s                    s  s
7 7 7     7   7 7 7     1  7      2      e 3 3W       7 7 7     T      7   8     7   8  3 3 3 3       7 2
7 7 7  :  1   7 7 7 :   S  7      3      h  9 9       7 7 7  :  V      7   g     7   g  9 9 9 9       7 3:
1 1 1     O   1 1 1     a  1  1   1  1   p  a ga   8  1 1 1     a   8  1   p  1  1   p  a a a a       1 1
i OiO  i  i   i OiO i   e  i 1iO 1i  i   g  p p    7  i O i  i  p   i Oi   g  i Oi   g  p p p p       i Oi
c c o oc c c c c l  l   e  c c o oc cl   r  i  i   g  c c o  c  i   c cl   r  c cl   r  i aia ai  i   c cl
i ai   i aia aia i  i   y  i ai   i ai   v  t  t   h  i a i  i  t   i ai   v  i ai   v  t ete et  t   i ai
i cih hi cic cic i  i   l  i cih hi ci   c  b ba   l  i c i  i  b   i ci   c  i ci   c  b b b b       i ci
h h h h h h he e r  r   e  h h h he er   -  e oe   e  h h h  e  e   h hr   -  h hr   -  e e e er  r   h hr
s cs   s csc csc s  s   h  s cs   s cs   t  n nt   h  s c s  s  n s c cs   t  s cs   t  n n n n s t   c cs
E E E E E E E S E E E E S E E S E E E E E E S E E S E E E E E E















                                                                                                             9






4                             4
9                             4                                               7
_         i                   0   8                                        i  0                          6
5         a   I               1   8                                        u  _      n                   8
C      i  a   u  I      2     K   _      e            0             )      s  1      t  3 4 5 6       6  _
7      o  R   B  s      _     C   1      l            9         t   1      l  K      p  p p p p       2  1
H  e   p  n   e  B      Y     E   O      h            s   e     A   g      m  O         3 3 3 3       s  O
E  r   c  t y z ae      S  t      E      e  i Bi      E   r     i   e      s  E  a   l  9 9 9 9       E E
i  p   e  p   e  h  C   i  r  i n i      n  u u    i ni   p     o r o      e  i  i   r  i nin nin i   i  i
r  a   o  r   o  e  i   r  i  r o r      t  u u    r or   a     p   (      a  r  e   p  r oro oro r   r  r
l  o y p  a   i  n  o   l  a  l p l      i  2 2s   l pl   o     s   s      m  l  i   g  l plp plp l   l  l
i  d d    g   s  t  p   i  d  i   i  i   d  i ni   i ci   d     r   i  e t e  i  u   p  i cic cic i   i  i
h rv v r  r   I  i  s   h  s  h h e  n   m  t ot   h h r  v me  e p e  r   v  h  u   v  h h h h h h   t  t
o  s   s  g   e di  r   o  i  o o t  t   A  g ga   o ot   s  o  i   o  a   a  o  e   a  o o o o o o   t  t
h co o c p t  y  m re   h h h h p D S S h h c hi   y y    o  l  a n e R p h lyp  a   p h h h h h hp




0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o r   r  r   r  r  r   r  r  r   r  r   r  r
2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2
r oro oro r o r oro r o r oro r o r oro oro r oro oro r o r oro r   r  r   r  r  r   r  r  r   r  r   r  r
i  i   i  i   i  i  i   i  i  i   i  i   i  i  i   i  i   i  i  i   i  i   i  i  i   i  i  i   i  i   i  i

2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2
O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O
- R-R R-R - R - R-R - R - R-R - R - R-R R-R - R-R R-R - R - R-R -   -  -   -  -  -   -  -  -   -  -   -  -
I  I   I  I   I  I  I   I  I  I   I  I   I  I  I   I  I   I  I  I   I  I   I  I  I   I  I  I   I  I   I  I
                                                          1                    8
1      1      5      5                                    1                    4
4      4      4      4                             7      -   9            3   1  3 3
.      .      .      .                             2          -      1     L   .  L L
s      s      s      s            7                M      7   3      -     E   s  E E
7  8   7  3   7  3   7  3 3    8  i   0            D      C   0      8     7 7 7 7              2   3
7  g   7  9   7  9   7  9 9    g  M   _            u   4  C   C      1  4  7 7 7 7:   :         N   0
1  p   1  a   1  a   1  a ga   p  a   4  a   4  a  n   1  a   D      S  1  1 1 1 1              M F T  4
i  g   i  p   i  p   i  p p    g  p   p  r   i  r  i   4  e   i  i   i  4  i O i Oi   i  i   i  i C i  i  i
c  r   c  i   c  i   c  i  i   r  i   s  n   c  n  r p s  e   y  c o c sp  c c c c o o o c c c c c cl  l  l
i  v   i  t   i  t   i  t  t   v  t   i  l   i  l  r   i  y   b  i   i aia i a i  i   i  i a i aia ai  i  i
i  c   i  b   i  b   i  b ba   c  b   i  l   i  l  c   i  l   l  i h i cic i c i hih hih i c i cic ci  i  i
h  -   h  e   h  e   h  e oe   -  e   h  e   h  e  b   h  e   e  h h h h h h h h h h h h h e e e e er  r  r
s  t   s  n s c  n s c  n nt   t  n s c  h   s  h el   s  h h i  s   s csc s c s  s   s  s c s csc cs  s  s
E S E E E E E E E S E E S E S P E S S E E E E E E E E E E E E E















                                                                                                              1





                                                   t
                                             l     n                 7                   K
   5      o                    5             n     u                 3                   c      2
   g      u                    g             t     s                 2                   e      1
   6      e      8         1   6             p     r                 5                   r      _
   -   i  p   i  p   i  0  p   -             r         2             F  2      i         s      N      i
       o  o   o  W   o  p  W                 a     ,   8             R  8 5    o  8 s e  n      U      o
   x   p  n   p  9   p  3  9   x             g     m _ 0      r      P  _ 1    p  1   e  e      E      p
   S   c  t   c  i   c  9  i   S             r     n 4 E      ,      H E Z1    c  Z   s  c      p      i
   i   e  r   e  o   e  i  o   i ni   e      5     e   i      e  i n i ni  i   e  i   t ot      i      r
i  r   o  e   o  p   o  r  p   r or   r      -     t   r      e  r o r ore r   o  r   s  e      r      s
t  l   y  r   y  l   y  l  l   l pl   t      P     r   l      e  l p l pl  l   y  l   c  r   e  l   i  4
p  i   d  m   d  i   d  i  i c i  i   i      C     e   i  a   i  i   i cic i   d  i   g fe   r  i   o  H
e  h r v  m   r  h r v  h h h ht  e   t nw   a  w rI   h  p   a  h h h h r t   v  h   v ve   2  h   p  c
f  o   s  e   s  o   s  o o o ot  t   d  n   p  n  e   o  n   6  o o o ot  t   s  o   a  a   h  o   h or  f
t  h c o c h c h h h h p u p u tr     e  n r o  n  y   h T I  S  h h h h c h p p M h M m M   c  y   c  i  t




0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o  r   r  r  r   r  r   r  r   r  r   r  r  r
2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3
r oro oro r o r oro oro r oro oro r o r oro oro r oro oro r o r  r   r  r  r   r  r   r  r   r  r   r  r  r
i  i   i  i   i  i   i  i  i   i  i   i  i   i  i  i   i  i   i  i   i  i  i   i  i   i  i   i  i   i  i  i

2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3
O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O
- R-R R-R - R - R-R R-R - R-R R-R - R - R-R R-R - R-R R-R - R -  -   -  -  -   -  -   -  -   -  -   -  -  -
I  I   I  I   I  I   I  I  I   I  I   I  I   I  I  I   I  I   I  I   I  I  I   I  I   I  I   I  I   I  I  I
                                                           9
                                                           -             C
                 h                                                       T
1                o                                      5                e
4                d                                      1  A             c           3                3
.      8 8       .                  1      1     1      P  B             l           L                L
s      1 1       s                  -      -     -      i  C             .           E                E
7      C C       s        7      7  6  7   6     6      l  T             b           7   O O O O      7
7  5   I  I  5   l    5   1  1   -  1  -   1     1   i  c  i             s           7   C C C C      7
1  1   i ui  6   p    6   a  A      S      S  a  S   e  b  a   n n n  s  a    _   n  1 P P P P 1      5
i Bi   e et  i   r    i   e  i   r  i  r   i  r  i   e  o  k   c c c     o    3   c  i A i AiA i   i  i
c cl   o o   c   h    c   e  c   n  c  n   c  n  c   a du  s   c c c  s  c    p   c  c o c c c c   l  c
i ai   e er  i   a  6 i   y  i   l  i  l   i  l  i   e  s  t   a a a  r  t    e   a  i   i aia i   i  i
i cit  a at  i   o  7 i   l  i   l  i  l   i  l  i   o  i  a   a a a     b    a   a  i h i cic i   i  i
h hr   o o   h   o C  h   e  h   e  h  e   h  e  h   a  s  n   a a a  t  e  4 o   a  h h h h h h   r  e
s cs   i  i  s   e TC s   h  s   h  s  h   s  h  s   e re  r   e e e  r  n  3 i   e  s   s csc s   s  s
E E C C E A A E S E S E S E S E N Y C S S S E 1 C S E E E E E E



                                                               Y Y    X  Y    W                       Z
                                                               e e e er  r    e                       e
                                                               T T T T        T                       T





                                                                                                      e
                                                                                                      r
                                                                                                      e
                                                                                                      n
                                                                                                      s     1
                                                                                                      e
                                                                                                      t
                                                                                                      u
                                                                                                      t
                                                                                                      d
                                           6                                                          a
                                           0                             Y                            n
                      r                    _                             e                  5 6 7 s   t
                      t   A  3      n      5                   n n       n                  R R R     e
   5   1 1            u   i  2      b      F  r            2   t et      t                  O O O     n
i  0   9 9   i 3 0    r   i  1      s      E  a            7   p pr      p        6      e  1 1 1     l
o  G   _ _   f   _    n   o  A      ,      P  g            0   c c n c   e        0 6    r O O O      c
p  D   D D   e   A    d   p  N      F      H  r  e         A   t at   t  t        R  1   g  E E E     n
c  E R R O   s   A    b   1  E      s      i  n  r         E   s  s   p  s        S Z1   d  A A A     i
e  i n i  i  -   i    -   I  i   s  t  e   o  t  p         i   r er   c  r        i ni   i  i nin  i  h
o  r o r er  N   r    i   e ro   o  y  a   p  r  a   i     r   u u    t  u        r or   -  r oro  r  i
y  l p l  l  t   l    b   m  l   s  P  c   l  s  o   o  s  l   u ur   s  u        l pl   P  l plp  l  g
d  i   i ci  e   i    l   e  i   t  A  r   i  t  d   p  i  i   t et   r  t        i ci   A  i cic  i  p
r  h h h et  -   h    n   o  h   v ve  a   h  v  r   t  n  h   v v    u  v        h ht   v  h h h  t  v
s  o o o  t  A   o    u   e  o   a  a  a   o  a  s   d  t  o   a at   u  a        o ot   a  o o o  t  a
c h h h I    m   h    i n i  h p p a h p c p p h p p t  r  y u u  t   e  p    t   h h p h h h p p     t




0 0 0 0 0 0           0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0                         0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0           0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0                         0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
o o o o o o  r   r    o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o or  r  r   r  r   r  r    o o o o o o o o  r   r  r
3 3 3 3 3 3           3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3                         3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3
r oro oro r  r   r    r o r oro oro r oro oro r oro or  r  r   r  r   r  r    r o r oro oro r  r   r  r
i  i   i  i  i   i    i   i  i   i  i  i   i  i  i   i  i  i   i  i   i  i    i   i  i   i  i  i   i  i

3 3 3 3 3 3           3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3                         3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3
O O O O O O           O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O                         O O O O O O O O
- R-R R-R -  -   -    - R - R-R R-R - R-R R-R - R-R R-  -  -   -  -   -  -    - R - R-R R-R -  -   -  -
I  I   I  I  I   I    I   I  I   I  I  I   I  I  I   I  I  I   I  I   I  I    I   I  I   I  I  I   I  I
                 0             0
          3      1             2                       9                                                   9
3 3 3     L   3  t             I                       0                 3                                 0
L L L     D   L  s             .                       .          0      L                                 .
E E E     7   E                s                       s          0      E     2   9                       s
7 7 7     :   7 2              7             7      O  2          H      7     3   0  8   1         3   8  2
7 7 7  :  1   7 3:             7         1   1      C  3   1  4   C  8   7     C   1  g   S  a a    9   g  3
1 1 1     O   1 1    4         1   8 8   5   a  8   P 1 A  1  1   T  T   1     V   E  p   a  D D    a   p  1
i OiO  i  o   i Oi0  i  i      i S i Hi  i   e  i A i Ni   i  4   i UiO  i  i  i   i  g   e  i E i  p   g  i
c c o  c  c   c c c cl  l   D  c o c c c l   e  c c c cl   l  s   c oc c c c c l   l  r   e  c c l  i   r  c
i ai   i aia aia i   i  i   p  i   i aia i   y  i a i ai   i  i a i  i a i aia i   i  v   y  i a i  t   v  i
i cih hi cic cic i   i  i   l  i h i cic i   l  i c i cih hih i c i hi c i cic i   i  c   l  i c i  b   c  i
h h h h h h h he e   r  r   e  h h h h e r   e  h h h h h h h h h h he e e e e r   r  -   e  h h r  e   -  h
s cs   s csc csc s   s  s   h  s   s csc s   h  s c s cs   s  s c s  s c s csc s   s  t g h  s c s  n   t  s
E E E E E E E E S E E E E S E E E E E E E E E E E S S E E E S E



A B C D E F
e er   e e e er  r
T T T T T T





e ein ne e e  i
r oro oro r   r
e e p pe e e
n n n n nc c
s as   s asa  s                                                                                                1
e es   e e e  s
t et   t ete  t
u u u u u r   r                6                              m
t et   t ete  t                7                              s
d d d d d                      2                              s
a a n na a a                   5                              i
n n n n nc c     F             1                              i
s as   s asa  s  e             o                    9         n                       5                 0  o
e es   e e e  s  n             i                    1  8   3  -                       g                 g  r
n n n n n r   r  t             c 2 9 9   n   9  9   1  7   2 ni      9                6      5 5        6  s
l cl   l clc  l  p   e         e   2 2   t   _  2   C  _   1  t   i  C         i      -   7  _ _    8   -  c
c c o oc c c     c o r         s _ 8 8   p   1  8   P  1 A 1  U   o  9 6       o          _  1 1    p      p
n n n n n ,   ,  t   g      r  E   S S   a   1 S8   A  O N    e   p  I 2 2     p   e  x   Y E ED    3   x  e
i oio oio i   i  s   d      r      E E   t D S EC      E E    -   c  U Z 1     c   t  S S E EC C    9   S  r
h h h h h i   i  r   i  s   p  i n i  i  t   i nin nin i   i  e   e  i n i     e   h  i n i nin ni  i   i  m
i nin nin i - i  u   b  c   a  r o r er  p   r oro oroer   r  Y   o  r o r     o   y  r o r oro ore r   r  m
g g g g ge e     u   P  r   o lp p l  l  h   l plp plp l   l      y  l p l     y   s  l p l plp plr l   l  e
p p p p p ta     e   G  3 t a  i   i ci  d   i  i c i ci   i  h   d  i c i     d   N  i   i cic cic i   i  o
v v v v v v ve e        n   v  h h h rt  v   h h h h het   t  o   r  h h t     r   -  h h h h h h e t   t  v
a at   a a a a a t   t  i   a  o o o  t  s   o o o o o t   t  i   s  o o t  t  s   y  o o o o o ot  t   t  a
p p p p p p p a  t   t  n   p h h h c h h h h h ty y y        o   c  h h A c v h h h h h h py y y u        t




0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o   r  r   r  r  r   r  r   r  r   r  r   r  r
3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4
r oro oro r o r oro oro r o r oro oro r oro oro r o r oro oro r   r  r   r  r  r   r  r   r  r   r  r   r  r
i  i   i  i   i  i   i  i   i  i   i  i  i   i  i   i  i   i  i   i  i   i  i  i   i  i   i  i   i  i   i  i

3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4
O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O
- R-R R-R - R - R-R R-R - R - R-R R-R - R-R R-R - R - R-R R-R -   -  -   -  -  -   -  -   -  -   -  -   -  -
I  I   I  I   I  I   I  I   I  I   I  I  I   I  I   I  I   I  I   I  I   I  I  I   I  I   I  I   I  I   I  I
                                                                        9                    2
                                      1                                 8         8          1  1      9
                                      4                   8   9         3         3          r  9      0
                                      .                   -   -         .         .          -  C      .
                                      s                                 s         s             t      s
   8 8               8         8      7  8   2  1  3   7  9 8           6         1   7 7       7   A  2
e g g  e  a a a      g  a  a   g      7  g   1 Sd  9   1  C   3      a  7  a a    :   C C    1  :   3  3  a
h hp p a  D D D      p  D D    p  1   1  p   a  a  a   a  D   C      D  1  D D    2   T T    1 5    2  1  D
p  g g    i E i  i   g  i Ei   g  i O i  g   e  e  p   e  r   C  9   i OiE i O i SiO OiE i E i  i   i  i  i
t  r n r  c c c  l   r  c oc   r  c c l  r   e ne  i   e  n   d 47   c c c c c c o o o o c c c c c cl  l  l
e v v  e  i a i  i   v  i  i   v  i a i  v   y ys  t   y  l   o  -   i aia i a i  i   i  i a i aia ai  i  i
o co o c  i c i  i   c  i hi   c  i c i  c   l dl  b   l al   l  B   i cic i c i hih hih i c i cic ci  i  i
c  -   -  h h h  r   -  h he   -  h h r  -   e  e  e   e el   e  g   h h h h h h h h h h h h e e e er  r  r
t xtx  t  s c s  s   t  s  s   t  s c s  t g h hi  n   h h h hi  a   s csc s c s  s   s  s c s csc cs  s  s
S S S E E E S E E S E E S S S E S S S P E E E E E E E E E E E E















                                                                                                              1




                                                                               a
                                                                               p
                                                                     s         r
   5                 7            7                                  l  2      m         7          6
   g                 g            0                                  u  5      f  6      1   0      1  9
   6      3 3 3      6  3 3       _      t                1          b  _      n  2      _   _  2   _  3
3  -   n  _ _ _      -  _ _       1      u             i  0          y  8      A  6   t  7   1  1   7  _
p      t  1 1 1         1 1    e  K      u   n         o  0          o  2      e O2   r  E   O  3   4  1  n
x x    p  E E E      x  E E    r  O   s  l   t         p  F          d  E      r  E   l  S   E  5   E  O  t
S St   e  E E E S E Et  C C    l  E   i  m p r         c  S      i   n     n   r  i   m  E   i  G E E  C  p
i ni   f  i n i nin ni  i  i   r  i   r  e   i  n      e  i      t   n  i  t   s eo   f  i   o  i n i  i  n
r or   a  r o r oro or  r  r   p  r   t  a   l  y      o  r      p   t  r  r   p  p   i  r   p  r o r  r  a
l pl   g  l p l plp pl  l  l   g  l   i  m   g  o      y  l      H   n  l  B   i  l   u  l   l  l p l  l  l
i ci   l  i c i cic  i  i  i   p  i   u  t h a  e      d  i      N   r  i  n a n  i   n  i c i cic  i  i  r
h ht   v  h h h h h ht  t  e   v  h   u  v   i  v  n   r  h      v   v  h  v v    h   -  h h h h h  t  t  v
o ot   a  o o o o o ot  t  t   a  o   e  a   t  a  t   s  o   S  a   s  o  a a t  o   t  o o o o o  t  t  a
h h p h h h h h h p h l        t  p   a  p b p p c h Y p c h p p h d h h h h h pe p   a  y y y y y u      t




0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o  r   r  r  r   r  r   r  r   r  r   r  r  r
4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4
r oro oro r o r oro oro r oro oro r o r oro oro r oro oro r o r  r   r  r  r   r  r   r  r   r  r   r  r  r
i  i   i  i   i  i   i  i  i   i  i   i  i   i  i  i   i  i   i  i   i  i  i   i  i   i  i   i  i   i  i  i

4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4
O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O
- R-R R-R - R - R-R R-R - R-R R-R - R - R-R R-R - R-R R-R - R -  -   -  -  -   -  -   -  -   -  -   -  -  -
I  I   I  I   I  I   I  I  I   I  I   I  I   I  I  I   I  I   I  I   I  I  I   I  I   I  I   I  I   I  I  I
                                                             5               1
                                               3             8               9          3
                                               L             B  7            C          L
          7                                    E             C  -            t          E     B         7
          K             a               1      7  -          N     0         7      9   7  0  0         1
a a    a  H  a a    u   1  a a    a a   S   a  7      6  9   k  1  8   1  7  :   8  T   7  1  4         E
D D D     a  D D    i   E  D D D D      a   D  1  0   0  5   i  a  1   A  A  5   T  U   1  C  E   4     i
i EiE  i  p  i E i  a i o  i EiE Ei  i  e   i Oi1 i   S  i   i  e  i N i  i  i U i  o   i Ei  o   i     a
c c o  c  i  c c l  u   c  c c o oc cl  e   c oc cl   n  c   b  e  c c c c c l   l  c   c cl  c   c  e  s
i ai   i  t  i a i  n   i  i ai   i ai  y   i  i ai   o  i   m  y  i a i aia i   i  i   i aia i   i  u  c
i cih  i  b  i c i  q   i hi ci h i ci  l   i hi ci   l  i   d  l  i c i cic i h i hih  i cic i a i  i  c
h h h  e  e  h h r  e   h h h h h e er  e   h h her   e  h   s  e  h h h h h h h h h h  e e e e   r  h  e
s cs   s  n sc c s  u   s  s cs   s cs  h   s  s cs   h  s   l  h  s c s csc s   s  s   s csc s   s  a  n
E E E E E E C E E E E E S E E E S E C S E E E E E E E E E E D E















                                     i                                                  U                   1
                                     o         3                                        9
                                     g         -                                        -
                                     h
                                     m      i
                                     f      o                                           P
                                     l  a      C                                        e            1
                                     r Gn      g             n                          a            9
             8                       p  t   e  h             g  5  0                    p            _  i
       g     0                       i  p   a  r      7  9   l  9  5   e  0  )          p            F  a
0 0    p     _   9      9 9       9 tt  o   p  y      1  1   c  _  0   h  5  Z          o            A  T
_ _    r     D   _      _ _       _  p  i   o  d      N  9   i  5  0   o  _  -          H            D  P
1 1    p     C   1  t   1 1       1  I  n t f  d  e   S  9   a  1  2   f  L             e            P  r
E E    r     E   E  p   E E       E  V  e   b  c  r   S  5   o  S  E   t  E  C          o  n n       P  r
E E    I  I      E  n   E E   n   E  s  e   e  e  e      E   -  i  E   e  i  s          m  t et   t  D  s
i ni   C  r  i n i  t   i ni  t   i  l  u   r  a ti   i ni      o  i   o  o  t          c  p pr   r  i  r
r or   t  s  r o r  a   r or  p   r  u  -   p lc  1   r or   e  p  r   m  p  m   e ei   e  i  i   i  r  T
l pl   r  p  l p l  y   l pl  o   l  b  t   t  n  L   l pl   r  l  l   c  l  d   r or   f  r ar   r  l  i
i ci   y er  i c i  b   i  i  b   i  y  h   n  e  D   i ci   i  i  i   t  i  d   l pl   t ninoi   a  i  h
h ht   t  a  h h t  c   h he  n   h  o  v   b  v  a   h ht   h  h he   v  h  o   t at   v  m m    m  h  c
o ot   u  p  o o t  n   o ot  Z   o  d  a   o  a  p   o ot   l  o ot   a  o  e   o or   a  g g e  g  o  y
h h r  e  p h h m h h F h E p R p p h h t   e  u ro   y y    r  h h P h S m m p P P p h p  h h    h y o l




0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o r  r   r  r  r   r  r   r  r  r   r  r  r
4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5
r oro oro r oro oro r o r oro r o r oro r o r oro r o r oro oro r  r   r  r  r   r  r   r  r  r   r  r  r
i  i   i  i  i   i  i   i  i  i   i  i  i   i  i  i   i  i   i  i  i   i  i  i   i  i   i  i  i   i  i  i

4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5
O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O
- R-R R-R - R-R R-R - R - R-R - R - R-R - R - R-R - R - R-R R-R -  -   -  -  -   -  -   -  -  -   -  -  -
I  I   I  I  I   I  I   I  I  I   I  I  I   I  I  I   I  I   I  I  I   I  I  I   I  I   I  I  I   I  I  I
                              a
                              r
                              s
3                             i
-                1            t                                         0      3
       6         -         1  e        -         7                      1      -
E  /   0         3  3  0   A  s 05  4            -  7      8 8 8        M      7      /     7
N  8   W  9  s   1  0 01   e  u  A  3  2            2   9  g g g        o 1 3  1      8  4  C      8
s  N   i  4  i   S  F  C   d  a SC  E  S  4   8  3  S   5 hp p p        n   1  S  1   N  1  T   8  T   8
t  i   e iH  b   i  i Ei   k  e  r  i  i  i S i  i      i  g g g        m   r  i  i R i  4  i S i Si   i
p  c l a co  i   c c c l   u  n  s  c c c c c l  l  d   c  r nrn  r  e  r   n  c c o  c sp  c o c c c  l
r  i   i ai  b   i aia i   y al  u  i aia i a i  i  o   i  v v v     u  l   l  i ai   i aia i   i aia  i
s  i h i ci  r   i cic i   n ne  a  i cic i c i  i  l   i  c c c a   i  r   l  i cih hi cichih  i cic  i
r  h h h er  n   h h h r   h  o  l  h h h h h r  r  e   h  -  -   -  h  m   e  h h h h h h h h  e e e  r
r  s   s cs  a   s csc s   e  a  h  s csc s c s  s  h   s  t xtx  t  a lo   h  s cs   s csc s   s csc  s
A E E E C E E E M S C E E E E E S E S S S D G S E E E E E E E E















                                                                                                           1
                                                        e
                                                        h
                                                        o
                                                        p
                                                        i
                                                        e            8                      i
                                                        m            0         4            t
   i                                                    o  6 5       _         0      0     p
   o                                   1                l  g g       F  i      2      1     i
   p         5                0     7  u      6         e  6 6       A  o      5  4   _     a          4
   i   i     3             3  1     _ in      0     2   i  - 8-      D  p   i  F  4   8  4  f          0
   m   o En  0      5      9  0     K  o      8     1   s            P  l   o  R  1   5  0  u          8
   d   p  t  B   e  c  n   K  A     O  p      S     O   a  x x       P  i   p  P  F   R  _  R      e   S
   n   c rp  C   r  i  t   M  S     E  n  i   E     S   -  S St      D  p   i  H E E EC  4  a      l   E
i  b   e  i  e   p  o  p   i ni     i  a  o   i     i   e  i ni      i  m   a  i nin ni  i  c      t   i
r  e   o  p  r   a  p  i   r or     r  c  p   r     r   r  r or      r  n   e  r oro or er  n   r  m   r
l gr   y  r  l   o  l  r   l pl     l  p  g   l  s  l   m  l pl   S  l  n   l  l plp pl  l  i s s  n   l
i  e   d  a  t   d  i  i   i ci     i  A  p   i  i  i   m  i ci   t  i  r   t  i ci   i ci  y   r  n   i
h  a   r  m  h   r  h  m   h ht     h  D  v   h  e  h   v  h ht   r  h  k   m  h h h he et  e   r da   h
o  i   s  g  p   s  o  g   o ot     o  g  a   o  o  o   a  o ot   i  o  e   A  o o o ot  t  o   A  A   o
h te   c p H c h P h h h   y y      h p p h e h p h h l y yp p    y  h h D h h h h e y      n   L D h  y




0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0                 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0                 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
o o o o o o o o o o r  r   r  r     o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o  r  r   r  r  r   r  r   r
5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5                 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5
r oro oro r oro oro r  r   r  r     r oro r o r oro r o r oro r o r oro r o r  r  r   r  r  r   r  r   r
i  i   i  i  i   i  i  i   i  i     i  i  i   i  i  i   i  i  i   i  i  i   i  i  i   i  i  i   i  i   i

5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5                 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5
O O O O O O O O O O                 O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O
- R-R R-R - R-R R-R -  -   -  -     - R-R - R - R-R - R - R-R - R - R-R - R -  -  -   -  -  -   -  -   -
I  I   I  I  I   I  I  I   I  I     I  I  I   I  I  I   I  I  I   I  I  I   I  I  I   I  I  I   I  I   I
                                                                                         a    a        a
                                                                        1                r    n        r
                                                                        1                s    m        s
          2                                                             -         2      i    e        i
          D                                                                       D      t    .     2 et
          E                                                             7  u      E      e    s     i  e
   0          0 0 0 0                 0 0 0                             C  i             s    s     l  s
   1      i   1 1 1 1                 1 1 1            8                C  t      i      u    a     r  u
   C   8  o   C C C C          2 2 C C C4 4     3 3    0  3  I   3      a gl      o      a    n     b  a
   i S i  g   i EiE i   i      i EiE EiE i 5iB 5iI i   i  i  i   i  i   e  m      g      e    m     t  e
   c o c fe   c c c c   l  D   c oc c c co o o oc c c cl  l  c c l  c   e  r  0   f  0   n    n     u  n
I  i   i aia aia i  i   i  p   i  i a i ai  i   i aia ai  i  i a i  i   y  c  1   i  1   l d  p  7  t  l s
c  i h i cic cic i  i   i  l   i hi c i ci hih hi cic ci  i  i c i  i   l  b  d i c  d   n r  e 78  a  n ii
g  h h h h h h h e  r   r  e   h h h h h h h h h h h her  r  e e r  e   e  y im   h  m   o l  b  H  c  o  e
h  s   s csc csc s  s   s  h   s  s c s cs  s   s csc cs  s  s c s  s   h  o  l   s  l   a e  l  G y   a  n
P E E E E E E E S E E E E E E E E E E E E S C P E P S W K M M S E















                                                                                                             1




                                                                        t
       g                                                                n
       h                                                                u
       r                                                                a
       4  9                                                             e                           a
       e  4      7 7       7      n             r            9          e                           e
p      i  _      3 3       2 n i  t             a 45      5  _   5      a                A          r
_      t  2      _ _       9   o  p             u 21      2  I   2      s                p          y
d      p  D      o o    d  i   p  a             r _P      P IA   P      c                t          e
P  r   n  E      E E    y  S   c  t             s  E      E E E         a                a          t
i  s   n  i   c  i ni   e  i   e  t   n n       o  i      i nin  i      -     1          u    s     r
r  p   b  r   t  r or   r  r   o  p t e et      t  r      r oroe r      -  p  n          e    o     u
l  i   -  l   r  l pl   l  l   y  h o p pr      e  l   n  l plp  l      e  T  r          t    s     s  C
i  a   c  i   y  i ci   t  i   d d    A A       t  i   t  i  i c i      b  s  f   t      o    t     y  e
h  v   c  h   t  h ht   h  h r v vr   E E   a   d  h   p  h h he t  a   e  o as   r  a   r    v     r  n
o  a   l  o   u  o ot   p  o   s  s   g g   g   l  o   L  o o o  t  g   l  s  o   2  g   y    a     y  t
h p n h r p   e  h h H h c y   o oc P P I   n   m h y h h h i y     n   E tr  r   U in   d    p     3 pr




0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0                                         0     0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0                                         0     0 0
o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o  r  r  r   r  r   r  r  r   r  r   r    o     o or
5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 6 6 6 6 6 6 7 7 7 7 7 7 7                                         7     7 7
r oro oro r o r oro r o r oro oro r o r oro r o r oro  r  r  r   r  r   r  r  r   r  r   r    r     r or
i  i   i  i   i  i  i   i  i   i  i   i  i  i   i  i   i  i  i   i  i   i  i  i   i  i   i    i     i  i

5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 6 6 6 6 6 6 7 7 7 7 7 7 7                                         7     7 7
O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O                                         O     O O
- R-R R-R - R - R-R - R - R-R R-R - R - R-R - R - R-R  -  -  -   -  -   -  -  -   -  -   -    -     - R-
I  I   I  I   I  I  I   I  I   I  I   I  I  I   I  I   I  I  I   I  I   I  I  I   I  I   I    I     I  I
a
o                         i               a
s                         n               r
c                         o               s
e                         a               i
e     1                   p               t       1   0      1                                1
p     -                   b               e    -  -   0      -                                -
u     0                   s               s       3   H      0               2      6  A      7      3 3
a     2                   i        8      u    7 1    C  5   2     5 5 5     N      -  3   1  1   5  0 0
r     S  4                n    a   3      a    S S    T  E   S  3  E E E     M   3  T  2   A  S   E  F F
n     i  i                m    r   i  i   e    i Mi   i Si   i  i SiS SiU i LiE Ni  i  i   i  i   i CiC i
e  T oc cl  0 0 0         s    n   c cl   n    c c c c o o o c c o c c c c c c o o  l  c c c c c cl  l  l
l  C  i ai  1 1 1         a    l   i ai   l u  i aia ai  i   i ai  i a i aia i   i  i  i a i aia ai  i  i
n  s cichi  d d d         o    l   i ci   n a  i cic cih i h i cih i c i cic i h i  i  i c i cic ci  i  i
o  h  h hr  m m m  i      o  9 e   h hr   o l  h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h h  r  e e e e e er  r  r
a  y sc cs  l   l al      e 44 h   s cs   a h  s csc cs  s   s cs  s c s csc s   s  s  s c s csc cs  s  s
S T E E P P P             A A S E E S C E E E E E E E E E E E E E E E E E E









                      a
                      c
                      e
                      r


                                                                                                            1
                      I
      s               g
      i               =
      e               u
      n               :
      i               m
      r               N                           9          6
      i               A   e                       5          3                         3
      i               e   M                       4          3               0         4   3
      t     8 e t     t   i                    6  5          5               8         _   2         e
      a     0   r  D  u   o           _        U 9F   i ni   F     i         _         7   1      i  y  2
      r     0   e  e  r   t           2        D  R   o ot   R     o         M         4   A      o  i  2
s     y     R   a  r  r   o           L        t  P   p pr   P it  p         U   r  e  E   N  e   p  o  c
t     r     i   i  a  r   n    c      p        r  H   c cl   H  r  c         E   r  r  E E C tr   c  p
y     y     o   r  u  e   t    h      i        e  i   e et   i  y  e      i ni   p  n  i n i  p   e  i  i
e     e  e  p   r  r  l   r    o      r        r  r   o ot   r  t  o      r or   a ai  r o r  a   o  -  r
o     s  a  l   r  n  u   r    h      l        b  l   y y    l  u  y      l pl   o  o  l p l  o y p  C  l
t     c  t ci   m  t  e   m    f      i        e  i   d d    i  r  d   s  i ci   a  3  i c i  d d    r  i
r     g  l  h   v  r  a   v    o      h        a  h r v vr   h  v  r   o  h ht   v  n  h h r  v v r  v  h
y     i  a  o   a  s  N   a    5   L  o   A    g  o   s es   o  a  s   s  o ot   a  i  o o t  s e s  a  o
d     a b h p t t  r  R p u    T I n  h T e    i  h c c o    h p c t   r  h h p at  n  h h c c p h   u yp




0     0 0 0 0 0 0 0            0 0 0 0         0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0     0 0 0 0 0 0 0            0 0 0 0         0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
o     o o o o o o or  r   r    o o o or   r    o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o  r  r   r  r   r  r  r
7     7 7 7 7 7 7 7            7 7 7 7         7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7
r     r oro r o r or  r   r    r o r or   r    r oro oro r o r oro r o r oro r o r  r  r   r  r   r  r  r
i     i  i  i   i  i  i   i    i   i  i   i    i  i   i  i   i  i  i   i  i  i   i  i  i   i  i   i  i  i

7     7 7 7 7 7 7 7            7 7 7 7         7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7
O     O O O O O O O            O O O O         O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O
-     - R-R - R - R-  -   -    - R - R-   -    - R-R R-R - R - R-R - R - R-R - R -  -  -   -  -   -  -  -
I     I  I  I   I  I  I   I    I   I  I   I    I  I   I  I   I  I  I   I  I  I   I  I  I   I  I   I  I  I
                                                   r                    r                      r
                                                   o                    o                      o
                                 a     a           s    a               s        a        a    s     a
                                 r     r           c    r               c        r        r    c     r
                    9            s     s    i      e    s               e        s        s    e     s
                    0            i     i    k      e    i               e        i        i    e     i
                    .            t     t    .           t     1      3           t        t          t
   -             1  s            e  6  e 6  s         6 e  6  -      -           e 6      e 6        e 6
       3  7  O 0 3  2            s  -  s -  7      s  - s  -  7      7  s        s -      s -  s     s -
   7   0  1  C   t  3  a         u     u    7      u    u     1  1   1  u  6     u        u    u     u
   S   F  a  P   a  1  D         a  C  a C  1      a  C a  C  S  E   S  a  4 2   a C  2   a C  a     a C
i  i   i  e  i   r  i Ei   i  i  e  r  e r  i   i  e  r e  r  i  i   i  e  S i   e r  i   e r  e     e r
c c o  c  e  c   n  c c o oc cl  n  s  n s  c c l  n  s n  s  c c c  l  n  t c   n s  c   n s  n     n s
i ai   i  y  i   l  i ai   i ai  l  u  l u  i a i  l  u l  u  i aia  i  l  g i   l u  i   l u  l  r  l u
i cih  i  l  i   l  i cih hi ci  n  a  n a  i c i  n  a n  a  i cic  i  n  b i   n a  i   n a  n  u  n a
h h h  e  e  h   e  h h h he er  o  l  o l  h h r  o  l o  l  h h h  r  o  d h   o l  h   o l  o  h  o l
s cs   s  h  s   h  s cs   s cs  a  h  a h  s c s  a  h a  h  s csc  s  a  e s l a h  s l a h  a  y  a h
E E E S E S E E E E S C S C E E S C S C E E E S H E S C E S C S T S C















                                                                                                          1






                                       n                         3 8 8
                    4                  t                         0 0 9
             6      3         1        p                         -   2
          n  3      3  8      p        g        B A                  5  6    5
          t  1      1  _      t        d    5 n i  i             1   F  0    3                 7
          p  O   0 CO  1      a  1     b    7 t o ot    5        _   R  _    2            7    p     5
       5  a  E   3  E  E      C  1     -    1   p pr    1        S   P  H    E            1    4     1
       c  t  A S F     E      p  S     A    p   i oi    S     n  E H S  e    E            S    R     S
   i   i  t  i n i ni  i      i ni     D    i   b bi    i     t  i n i  i    i        s   i    i     i
   o   r  p  r o r or  r      r or     d    r   n ni    r     p  r o r  r    r        o   r    r     r
   p   l  h  l p l pl  l      l pl     n    l   S Si    l     o  l p l  l    l   t    s   l    l     l
   a   i  d  i c i ci  i      i  i     t    i   S S     i     c  i c i  i    i   r    t   i    i     i
w re   h rv  h h h ht  t      h he     -    h   i di    h     s  h h h  e    h   I    v   h    h     h
n  A   o  s  o o o ot  t   i  o ot     g    o   s ms    o     i  o o o  t    o   A    a   o    o     o
u D h c h h h h Y h h      c  y y      s    h p p al    h     a h h hy       h C c    p h p    h     h


                           2 3 4       5    6 7 8       9     0 1 2 3        4 5      6 8      9     0
                           0 0 0       0    0 0 0       0     0 0 0 0        0 0      0 0      0     0
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 o o o      f  r  r     r    r   r  r    r     r  r   r  r    r   r    r   r    r     r
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 9 9                  9    9 9 9       9     9 9 9 9        9 9      9 9      9     9
o o o o o o o o  r  r  r   d d d       d    d d d       d     d d d d        d d      d d      d     d
7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 f          o ofo f     f    f o f  f    f     f ofo of  f    f o f    f o f    f     f
r oro oro r oro  r  r  r   c cf  c     c    c c c  f    c     c c c  f  c    c c f    c c f    c     c
i  i   i  i  i   i  i  i   s  s  s     s    s   s  s    s     s  s   s  s    s   s    s   s    s     s

7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7
O O O O O O O O            B B B       B    B B B       B     B B B B        B B      B B      B     B
- R-R R-R - R-R  -  -  -   E E E       E    E E E       E     E E E E        E E      E E      E     E
I  I   I  I  I   I  I  I   p p p       p    p p p       p     p p p p        p p      p p      p     p
                               a                                                                         a
                               r                                                              0          r
          i                    s                  4             4                             4          s
          k                    i                  4             4                             E          i
          .                    t    1             .             .  3                          t          t
          s   A         -      e 6  -          -  s             s  -                          7          e
          7   7                s -  0          8  7             7  7                          :          s
          7   4         8      u    S   1 1       7             7  1                          1          u
       P  1   E         S      a C  M   E E    S  1             1  S      P P P P P           O      P   a
i  i   -  i   o  i  i   i  i   e r  o   i Si   i  i  i   i  i   i  i  i   -  -   -  -  -   i  o   i  -   e
c cl   I  c   c  c c c ol  c   n s  c   c c c c c o o o oco c c c cl  l   I bIb bIb I  I   c  c   c  I   n
i ai   o  i a i aia i   i  i   l u  i a i aia ai  i  i   i  i a i ai  i   o o o o o l  l   i ai   i  o   l
i ci   d ic c i cic i   i  i   n a  i c i cic cih i hih hi  i c i ci  i   d d d d d i      c cih  i  d   n
h hr   m  h h h h h h   r  e   o l  h h h h h h h h h h he  e e e er  r   m m m m m i  i   h h h  e  m   o
s cs   l  s c s csc s   s  s l a h  s c s csc cs  s  s   s  s c s cs  s   l  l a l  l  l   s cs   s  l   a
E E P E E E E E E S C E E E E E E E E E E E P P P P P E E E P S















                                                                                                             1






                                        1                          2
              0                         0      i                   1      0 0 0 0 0
4             D  9 8                    -      o                   2      _ _ _ _ _
p             _  p p                           p                   5      P P P P P
t             7  t et               i   1      i                   F      -  -   -  -  -
a  6          4  a a           4    o   _      a                   R
C  0          E  C C       A   0    p   S  i   g     e             P      l blb blb l  l   e      a
p  L   e      E  p p       n   S    c   E  o   n     r             H      C C C C C        p      c  i
i ni   o      i nin i   i  r   i    e   i  p   m     p             i      i nin nin i  i   p      n  t
r or   m      r oro r   n  f   r    o   r  t   t     t   l yl      r      r oro oro r  r   a      n  p
l pl   c      l plp l   t  t   l    y   l  u   d     l   m m       l  n   l plp plp l  l   i  s   i  n
i ci   m      i cic i   p  r   i    d   i  r   -     e   s  s      i  t   i  i c i  i  i   s  m   r  d n i
h ht   s      h h h t   v  r   h    r   h  v   i     a   s  s      h  p   h h h h h t  e   i  p   -  b   o
o ot   x  B   o o o t   a  n   o    s   o  a   l  Y  i   i ui   U  o  R   o o o o o t  t   k  A   T  P   p
h h r  e  N h h h p c h t  o   y    c h p e T F F F T h T h h h h h t r   y y y y y        h  D E A lT   i


1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0                 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 2
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0                 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
r  r   r  r   r  r  r   r  r   r    r   r  r   r  r  r   r  r   r  r  r   r  r   r  r  r   r  r   r  r   r
9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9                 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9
d d d d d d d d d d                 d d d d d d d d d d d d d d d d d d d d d
f ofo ofo f o f ofo f   f  f   f    f o f ofo ofo f ofo ofo f o f ofo f o f of   f  f  f   f  f   f  f   f
c cf   c c c c c c  f   f  c c f    c c c c c cf  f  f   c  c c c c c f   f  c c c  f  c c c  f   c c c  f
s  s   s  s   s  s  s   s  s   s    s   s  s   s  s  s   s  s   s  s  s   s  s   s  s  s   s  s   s  s   s


B B B B B B B B B B                 B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B
E E E E E E E E E E                 E E E E E E E E E E E E E E E E E E E E E
p p p p p p p p p p                 p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
                           a           a                                                    a
                           r           r                                                    r
                           s     4     s                                                    s           4
                           i     4     i                                                    i           4
                        1  t     .  1  t                                                    t           .
                    -   -  e     s  -  e                                             -      e           s
                        7  s     7  7  s  8                                                 s  8        7
                 6  8 1    u     7  1  u  9               1         1         i      8   1  u  9        7
   P P           A  S S    a     1  S  a  2            2 E1         E   P     e      S   E  a  2        1
   -   -  i  i   i  i M i  e     i  i  e  V  i  i   i  i Si   i  i  i   -  i  e   i  i   i  e  V  i  i  i
   I b I  c c c c c l   l  n     c oc  n  r  c c c c c o o o  c c c l   I  c  a   c c o  c  n  r  c c c l
r  o o l  i aia aia i   i  l  r  i  i  l  s  i aia aia i  i   i aia i   o  i  e   i ai   i  l  s  i aia i
u  d d i  c cic cic i   i  n  u  i hi  n  k  i cic cic i hih  i cic i   d ic  o   i cih  i  n  k  i cic i
h  m m i  h h h h h r   r  o  h  h he  o  t eh h h h h h h h  e e e r   m  h  a   h h h  e  o  t eh h h r
y  l   l  s csc csc s   s  a  y  s  s la  e  s csc csc s  s   s csc s   l  s  e   s cs   s la  e  s csc s
T P P E E E E E S T E E S K E E E E E E E E P E N E E E S K E E E















                                                                                                            2






                    7
   0 0              1                                                   1
   _ _           a  6                                                   _         C  s               4
   P P           b  5                                         i Oi      P  i      r  N            _  p
   -   -         m F9   i  1        i        I      i         i ni      -  i      i ot            c  t
                 e  R e o  p        o        y      r         t et         t      t  a      i     I  a
   l b l         A  P   p  4        p        n      ;  t  i   p pr      l  p      p fn      o     1  C
   C C           N  H l c  R        c        p  t e t  r  i   f ef      C  f      f  t      p     N  p
   i n i         c  i   e  i     '  e        r  l u l  e  t   n ns      i  n      n  i      i     i ni
   r o r  l      i  r   o  r     n  o  n     A  n n    r  p   t at  N   r  t  i   t  r      i     r or
   l p l  m  n   p  l   y  l     t  y  t     2  p p i  b  n   g gl  P   l  g  o   g  n   n  n     l pl
   i   i  s  t   -  i   d  i     p  d  p     A  r e r  e  d   j uj  i   i  j  p   j  t   t  n     i ci
   h h e  s  p   o  h r v  h     o  r  o     a  V V    a  b   c c   o   h  c  t   c  r   p  a     h ht
   o o t  i  E   f  o   s  o     f  s  f     t  e e I  g  P   I 1I  p   o  I  d   I  s   A  l     o ot  g
   h h F T s r   h  h c o  h     s  c sh     p ty y t  i  A I n nI  l   h In  p I n  t   T re     h h Y a


   3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0               1 2 3       4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8                        9 0 1
   0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0               0 0 0       0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0                        0 0 0
   r   r  r  r   r  r   r  r     r  r  r     r  r   r  r  r   r  r  r   r  r  r   r  r   r  r     r  r  r
   9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9               9 9 9       9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9                        9 9 9
   d d d d d d d d               d d d       d d d d d d d d d d d d d d d                        d d d
   f o f ofo f o f  f   f  f     f ofo f     f ofo ofo f ofo ofo f ofo ofo f  f   f  f   f  f     f ofo f
   c   c c c c c c  f   f  c     c  c cf     c c c c c f  f   c c c c c c  f  f   c cf   c cf     c c c f
   s   s  s  s   s  s   s  s     s  s  s     s  s   s  s  s   s  s  s   s  s  s   s  s   s  s     s  s  s


   B B B B B B B B               B B B       B B B B B B B B B B B B B B B                        B B B
   E E E E E E E E               E E E       E E E E E E E E E E E E E E E                        E E E
   p p p p p p p p               p p p       p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p                        p p p
a                           a                                     3
r                           r                                     3
s                           s                        9            5      3
i                           i                        0            C      L 49
t                           t                        .            A      D  -                   2
e     -                     e    -            -      s            u      7                      i      -
s                           s                        2            p   3  :  8                   l
u     2                     u    2            2      3 9          c   0  1  3                   r      8
a     S                     a    S      3  P  S      1 2          r   F  O  C                   b   P  S
e     i  i  i     i  i  i   e    i   i  i  -  i   i  i Hi   i  i  y   i  o  C   i     i      i  t   -  i
n     c c c l     c oc cl   n    c c c  l  I  c c c c o o   c cl  s   c  c  d   c     c      c  u   I  c
l     i aia i     i  i ai   l e  i a i  i  o  i a i ai  i   i ai  y   i ai  o   i     i      i  t   o  i
n  s  i cic i     i hi ci   n v  i c i  i  d ic c i cih i   i ci  m   i ci  l   i     i      i  a   d ic
o  n  h h h r     h h her   o n  h h h  r  m  h h h h h h   e er  p   h hr  e   h     h      h  c   m  h
a  n  s csc s     s  s csl  a o  s c s  s  l  s c s cs  s   s cs  t   s cs  h   s     s      s  y   l  s
S I E E E         E E E S M E E E P E E E E E E S E E S E                             E      E M P E

            -               -
            X               M
            C  1            T                                                   g g g g
            l  -            l                                                   g g g g
            b M             b                                                   A A A A









                                                                                                          2
                                                                                          o
                                                                                          u
                                                                                          r
                                                                                          :
                                                                                   o      g
                                                                                   u  e   F
                                                                                   r  n   D
            6           9            s     0                                       :  e   g         0
            0           0            h     _      2         4               0      g  d   A     a   _
            1        n  1            y     P      0  7      _            E  A      F  e   t     e   P
      i     -        T  -            e     b      _  _  i   c  i         I  2      B  f   r     r   -
      o              s           i   i  e ol      V 31  o   I  o         i  5      g  d   e     y
      p     1        p  1   s    o   i  r  C  i   2  O  p   1  p  n   5  e  B      A  e   r     e   l
      c     p        a  p   m    p   -  n     o   p  E  c   N  c  t   c  c  S      t  i   p     t   C
      e  i ni     s  t  i   c    a      a  i  p   i ni  e   i  e  p   i  e  i      r  s   h     r   i
      o  r or     s  r  r   -    m   a  o  r  i   r or  o   r  o  e   r  i  r   e  l  -   l  a  u   r
      y  l pl     s  f pl   t    d   i  B  l  a   l pl  y   l  y  r   l  o  l   r  u      u  o  s   l  n
s     d  i ci     r  s  i   b    d   a  p  i  e   i ci  d   i  d  s   i  p  i   7  e  U   e  r  y   i  t
o     r  h ht     1  o  h   -    r   i  n  h  l   h h r v   h rv  v   h  w  h   4  a  ,   a  v  r   h  p
s     s  o ot     c  s  o   M    s   y  t  o  I   o ot  s   o  s  a   o n ot    g  N  a   N  a  y   o  A
t     c h hy      I  t  h T E    c c p h D h h c  y y   o   h co  p h u h A R H R p 3 h S e  u  -   y  t


2     3 4 5       6 7 8 9        0 1 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 0 1 2 3
0     0 0 0       0 0 0 0        0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
r     r  r  r     r  r  r   r    r   r  r  r  r   r  r  r   r  r  r   r  r  r   r  r  r   r  r  r   r  r
9     9 9 9       9 9 9 9        9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6
d     d d d       d d d d        d d d d d d d d d d d d d d d d d d d d d d
f     f ofo f     f ofo f   f    f o f ofo f ofo ofo f ofo ofo f ofo ofo f of   f  f  f   f  f  f   f  f
c     c c c f     c  c c c  f    c c c cf  f  c c c cf  f   c cf  c c c c c c   f  f  c c c c c c   f  f
s     s  s  s     s  s  s   s    s   s  s  s  s   s  s  s   s  s  s   s  s  s   s  s  s   s  s  s   s  s


B     B B B       B B B B        B B B B B B B B B B
E     E E E       E E E E        E E E E E E E E E E A A A A A A A A A A A AA A A A A A A
p     p p p       p p p p        p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
                                 -                                                              v
                                                                                                r
       a                         S                         a        a                      a    s
       r                         M                         r        r                      r
       s                         u                         s        s                      s
       i                         c                         i        i                      i    i
       t                         o                         t        t                      t    t
       e                         e            -         1  e     -  e                      e    e
A      s 8            2          a               0      3  s        s     3 3              s  8 s
3      u 9         4  N      3   m     9      7  8   4  t  u     5  u     0 0       9      u  9 u
2  P   a 2         1  M      8         5 5    S  1   1  a  a     S  a     F F       2      a  2 a
i  -   e V  i   i  4  i   i  i   m  i  i 1 i  i  i   4  r  e     i  e     i Ci   i  i  i   e  V e     i
c  I n t r  c o c sp  c c c  l   i  c c c c c s  l   p  n  n     c  n     c c c c o l  c   n  r n     c
i  o   l s  i   i aia i a i  i   p  i aia aia i  i   i  l  l  r  i  l     i aia ai  i  i   l  s l  r  i
i  d   n k  i h i cic i c i  i   t  i cic cic i  i   i  l  n  u  i  n  k  i cic cih i  i   n  k n  u  i
h  m   o t eh h h h h h e r  r   n  h h h h h h  r   r  e  o  h  h  o  t eh h h h h r  e   o  t o  h  h
s  l   a e  s   s csc s c s  s   a  s csc csc s  s   s  h al  y  s la  e  s csc cs  s  s l a  e a  y  s
E P S K E E E E E E M E E E E E E S S T E S K E E E E E S K S T E










                                 s
                                 a
                                 t
                                 p
                                 -
                                                                                                            2

                                 l                                                     O
                                 c                                                     F
                                 o
                                 m            A         X                                  X
                                 l            e         r                                  r
                      0          a            r         n                              e   n
   0                  0          e            i         t                              r   t          I
   _                  _          d     0      n         p                              p   p          T
   P        d d       M          p  2  _      n         o  3                           t   o    3     s
i  -        C C c  7 CU          p p0  8      t         a  1        i        1   0  i bi   a    1     i
o           e n e  3  1          i 64  5   0  l  i      t  _        o        6   1  o  i   t    _     h
p  l        r o r  _  p          a  C C    F  e  o      a  T        p     6  c   1  p  t   a    T     s
h  C        e p e  E             y  p p    I  d  p      u  p        c     c      p  c  t   u    p     k
c  i        n n c  i ni          t  i nin  i  m oi   n  p  i     a  e     i nin  i  e  f   p    i     n
a  r        e n e  r or      e   e  r oro  r  l  i e t  e  r     T  o     r oro  r  o  e e r    r     e
k l         i n i  l pl      r   D  l plp  l  y  n   p  n  l     s  y     l plp  l  y  n n s    l     n
6  i        m m a  i ci      t : 6  i cic  i  m  n n    t  i     i hd     i cic  i  d  t a t    i     t
v he   a    i d i  h ht      i   5  h h h  t  f ia a t  a  h     h  r     h h h rt  v  a a l    h     a
a  o   o    s m s  o ot   9  g   G  o o o  t  F  l c l  j  o     A  s     o o o  t  s  j u j    o     j
p h r  e    p p h h o p C h h h iO  y y y     n  r e r  c  h     D co     h h h c   o oc c      h     c


5 6 7       8 9 1 2 4 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5                        6 7      8 9 0 1 2 3           4     5
0 0 0       0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0                        0 0      0 0 0 0 0 0           0     0
r  r   r    r   r  r  r   r  r   r  r  r   r  r  r   r  r  r     r  r     r  r   r  r  r   r    r     r
6 6 6       6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6                        6 6      6 6 6 6 6 6           6     6
d d d       d d d d d d d d d d d d d d d                        d d      d d d d d d           d     d
f ofo  f    f o f ofo f o f ofo ofo f ofo  f  f  f   f  f  f     f of     f ofo ofo f  f   f    f     f
c cf   c    c   c c c c c f  f   c  c c c c c c  f   f  c  c     c cf     c c c cf  f  c c f    c     c
s  s   s    s   s  s  s   s  s   s  s  s   s  s  s   s  s  s     s  s     s  s   s  s  s   s    s     s



A A A       A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A                        A A      A A A A A A           A     A
p p p       p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p                        p p      p p p p p p           p     p
a
r
s
i               4
t               1  1             1                                   1                         2  7
e               H  -             -                   1               -                         i  2
s  8               5             3                   1         9     5               8  2      l  1
u  9     9      C  1             1  4   9 9 9     4         4  9     1  9        4   N 29      r  C   9 9
a  2     5      T  S      3      S  1   5 5 5     1  a      1  5     S  5     4  1   M  W      b  T   5 5
e MV     i  i   i  i   i  i  i   i  4   i 5i5 i   4  e  i   4  o     i  i     i  4   i Bi  i   t  i 5 i  i
n  r  0  c c o oc c c c c l  l   c  s   c c c s   p  e  c   s  c     c cl     c sp   c oc cl   u  c c c  l
l  s  1  i ai   i aia aia i  i   i  i a i aia i   i  y  i   i ai     i ai     i aia  i  i ai   t  i a i  i
n  k  d ic ci h i cic cic i hih hi  i c i cic i   i  l  i h i ci     i ci     i cic hih i ci   a  i c i  i
o  t im  h h h h h h h h h h h h h  e e e e e r   r  e  h h h er     h hr     h h h h h e er   c  h h h  r
a  e  l  s cs   s csc csc s  s   s  s c s csc s   s  h  s   s cs     s cs     s csc  s  s cs   y  s c s  s
S K P E E E E E E E E E E E E E S E E E                              E E      E E E E E M E E E










                                                                                                      n
                                                                                                      t
                                                                        r                             p
                                                                        u                             r
                                                               t        o                             a      3
                                                               s        (                             u      2
                                                               x        n                             r
                                                               t        m                             I
                                                               t        r                             -
                                                               p        (
                                        r                      n        e
                                        r                      t        r                             F
                                        s                      u        I        t                    A
I                                       a                      d        a     i  e                    (
T     r                                 t                      e        b     o  a                    g
s     2                                 B                      e        i     p  (             5      r
i     1         e  i             i      f                   0  (        e     a  o             0      a
h     p         l  o             o      n     t             3  s        e     o  u             2      t
s     0         o rp             p      t     r             _  u        e     d  r      s      t      a  1
k     R         y  c   e         c      r     e             E  r        a        p      s      M  1 n a  I
n     i         s  e   a     s   e      g     r      t      i  t     s  v     s  p   e  s  i n i  R   t  A
e     r         r  o   b     o   o      d     m      e      r  e     o  a     o  e   a  r  r o r  O   r  F
n     l         c  y   o     s   y      b     e   a  a  1   l  a     s  r     s  a   p  6  l p l  3   s  O
t     i  r      l  d   r     t   d      B     t   m  o  I   i  o  t  r  g     t  o   n  1  i c i  I   t  s
a     h  n      v  r   v     v   r      A     o   p  p  s   h  p  e  2  a  n  v  p   t  ,  h h t  v v    o
j     o  t  M   a  s   a  A  a   s  t C t AtP t   t  i  t   o  i  g  s  k  t  a  i   8  a  o o t  a a t  s
c     h P T p c p S p cu  e  u   o  A A A A A s      e  p h S ( I f SP  1 p p S Ie   S  C h h p p t   t  r


6     7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6                            7 9      0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
0     0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0                            0 0      0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
r     r  r  r   r  r   r  r  r   r  r   r  r  r   r  r  r   r  r     r  r     r  r   r  r  r   r  r   r  r
6     6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6                            6 6      6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6
d     d d d d d d d d d d d d d d d d d d                            d d      d d d d d d d d d
f     f ofo f o f ofo ofo f ofo ofo f o f  f  f   f  f  f   f  f     f of     f ofo ofo f ofo of  f   f  f
c     c c c f   c c c c c f  f   c  c c c c c c   f  f  c   c cf     c cf     c c c  f  c c c c c c   f  f
s     s  s  s   s  s   s  s  s   s  s   s  s  s   s  s  s   s  s     s  s     s  s   s  s  s   s  s   s  s



A     A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A A                            A A      A A A A A A A A A
p     p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p                            p p      p p p p p p p p p
   2                  7
   i                  -
   l                  9
3  r   4  9 9      9  1  3      6
8  b   1  5 5      5  S 86   G  0
i  t _ 4  i 5i     i  i Mi   5  S
c  u   s  c cl     c c c l   n ne
i  t   i aia i     i aia i   o o
i  a   i cic i     i cic i   l  l
h  c   h h h r     h h h r   e  e
s  y   s csc s     s csc s   h hi
E M E E E          E E E S S











             e
             a
             e
             s  e
             P sr            5                                                                            2
             (  m            I
             s  i            n
             e P             m
             m  A            e
             -  M            c
                P            e
             l  (            e
             d  e            n
             t  r  8         t
   5         p  m _0         s  I
   0   5  n  o  i 98 in      i  h
   2 0 3  m  i  t  5  o      f  i
   t 2 _  a  -  h  C rp      s  d
   M   E  (     o  p  c      i  d
   i n i  s  n  p  i te      s  n
   r o r  o  t  y  r  o      o ne
   l p l  s  p  l  l  y      s  t
s  i   i  t  I  n  i  d  s   t  p
o  h h e  v v   n  h rv  o   v ve
s  o o t  a at  p  o se  s   a  a
t  h h p p ( h c t y no  r   p pt


9 0 1 3 4          5 6 7 8 9
0 0 0 0 0          0 0 0 0 0
r  r   r  r  r     r  r  r   r  r
6 6 6 6 6          6 6 6 6 6
d d d d d          d d d d d
f ofo ofo f  f     f ofo f o f  f
c cf   c c c f     c c c c   f  c
s  s   s  s  s     s  s  s   s  s



A A A A A          A A A A A
p p p p p          p p p p p
Chapter 5


Performance comparison of

benchtop high-throughput
sequencing platforms



















                 112
    Performance comparison of bench-top high-throughput


                             sequencing platforms


   Nicholas J. Loman , Raju Misra , Tim Dallman , Chrystala Constantinidou ,        1

               Saheer Gharbia , John Wain     2,3, and Mark J. Pallen  1*

 1
  Centre for Systems Biology, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, B15 2TT,

                                   United Kingdom
   2Health Protection Agency, 61 Colindale Avenue, London, NW9 5HT, United

                                       Kingdom
    3
     School of Medicine, University of East Anglia, Norwich, NR4 7TJ, United

                                       Kingdom




      * Joint corresponding authors, e-mail for correspondence m.pallen@bham.ac.uk and
                                    j.wain@uea.ac.uk



Abstract

Three bench-top high-throughput sequencing instruments are now available. The 454 GS Junior

(Roche), MiSeq (Illumina) and Ion Torrent PGM (Life Technologies) are laser-printer sized and
oﬀer modest set-up and running costs. Each instrument can generate a draft bacterial genome

sequence in days, making them attractive for use in the identiﬁcation and characterization of
pathogens in the clinical setting. We compared the performance of these instruments by sequencing

isolates of Escherichia coli O104:H4 from the German outbreak of 2011. We compared performance

of the platforms, analysing throughput, read length, read error proﬁle and rate, de novo assembly
quality and completeness. MiSeq had the highest throughput and lowest error rate. The 454 Junior

generated the longest reads and best assemblies. The Ion Torrent PGM produced intermediate
throughput with the shortest reads. The Ion Torrent PGM and 454 GS Junior both suﬀer from

errors in homopolymers.













                                            1
Over the past decade and a half, genome sequencing has transformed almost every corner of the

biomedical sciences, including the study of bacterial pathogens [1]. In the last ﬁve years, high-
throughput (or "next-generation") sequencing technologies have delivered a step change in our

ability to sequence genomes, whether human or bacterial [2, 3]. Since arriving in the market
place, these technologies have experienced sustained technical improvement, which, twinned with

lively competition between alternative platforms, has placed genome sequencing in a state of

permanent revolution.
   Although high-throughput sequencing has seen extensive use in bacteriology, e.g. in the ge-

nomic epidemiology of bacterial pathogens [4], until recently sequencing platforms were tailored
chieﬂy towards large-scale applications, focused on the race to the "$1,000 human genome", with

footprints, workﬂows, reagent costs and run times poorly matched to the needs of small labo-

ratories studying small genomes. However three diﬀerent bench-top high-throughput sequencing
instruments are currently available, all roughly the size of a laser printer, with modest set-up and

running costs and all capable of sequencing bacterial genomes in a matter of days (Table 1).
   The 454 GS Junior from Roche was released in early 2010 and is a smaller, lower-throughput

version of the 454 GS FLX machine, exploiting similar emulsion PCR and pyrosequencing ap-
proaches, but with lower set-up and running costs. The Ion Torrent Personal Genome Machine

(PGM) was launched in early 2011 [5]. Like the 454 GS Junior, this technology exploits emulsion

PCR. This platform also incorporates a sequencing-by-synthesis approach, but uses native dNTP
chemisty and relies on a modiﬁed silicon chip to detect hydrogen ions released during base incor-

poration by DNA polymerase (making it the ﬁrst "post-light" sequencing instrument). The MiSeq
(Illumina) was announced in January 2011 and began to ship to customers in the fourth quarter

of 2011. The MiSeq is based on the existing Solexa sequencing-by-synthesis chemistry [6] but has

dramatically reduced run times compared to the Illumina HiSeq (fastest run 4 hours versus 1.5
for 36-cycle sequencing or 16 hours versus 8.5 days for 200-cycle sequencing) made possible by a

reduced size ﬂow cell, reduced imaging time and faster microﬂuidics.
   We wished to compare the performance of these three sequencing platforms by analysing data

with commonly used assembly and analysis pipelines. We therefore benchmarked these platforms
by using them to genome-sequence isolates from the recent outbreak of Shiga-toxin-producing E.

coli (STEC) O104:H4 that struck Germany between May and July 2011. This outbreak was re-

sponsible for over 4000 infections and more than 40 deaths [7]. Previous whole-genome sequencing
eﬀorts applied to isolates from the outbreak yielded novel diagnostic reagents and provided im-

portant clues as to the nature, origins and evolution of the outbreak strain [8–12]. These eﬀorts
also demonstrated the utility of an "open-source" approach to outbreak genomics that included

rapid sequencing, a liberal approach to data release and use of crowdsourcing [10]. Although all

infections during the outbreak were acquired in Germany, travellers took their infections back to
other countries in Europe and North America, including the United Kingdom [7]. Here, we have

focused on a single E. coli isolate of serotype O104 from the United Kingdom epidemiologically
linked to the German outbreak.







                                                2
Results


Creation of reference assembly

To permit comparisons of bench-top sequencing data we generated a reference assembly for E. coli
O104:H4 280 (HPA materials identiﬁer H112160280) using established high-throughput sequencing

platforms. This strain was recovered from a female traveller returning from Germany who had

developed hemolytic uremic syndrome and thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura. The strain was
conﬁrmed as typical of an outbreak strain (ST678, stx-2 ositive and intimin negative) [13].

   We used the Roche 454 GS FLX+ system to generate very long fragment reads (modal read
length 812bp bases, maximum read length 1170 bases) to an estimated 32-fold mean coverage.

Additionally, Roche 454 GS FLX was used to sequence an 8kb insert paired-end library using
Titanium chemistry. The reads were assembled into contigs, which were scaﬀolded to produce a

draft reference assembly. The use of abundant long reads and long-insert paired-end information
plus error correction from a complementary sequencing technology resulted in a very high quality

draft genome assembly consisting of three scaﬀolds. 99.42% of the bases in the assembly are Q64
bases (the highest quality assigned by Newbler, representing accuracy of one miscall around every

2.5m bases), 99.6% are Q30 or higher. Lower quality bases were masked with a lower-case letter.
The largest scaﬀold corresponded to the chromosome (5,340,022 bp), the two smaller scaﬀolds

corresponded to two large plasmids (pESBL and pAA). The 1.5kb plasmid sequence was present

in a single contig. Although each scaﬀold represented a single circular replicon, 153 gaps remained
within the scaﬀolds. These gaps represent repetitive regions longer than the mean read length

and shorter than the paired-end insert library and which cannot be resolved by this sequencing
strategy.


Characteristics of reads from bench-top sequencers


Genome depth, evenness of coverage, read length and read quality are the four major factors
which determine the ability to reconstruct genome sequences from sequence data. There were large

diﬀerences in the number, predicted quality and length of reads obtained from the three platforms
(Table 2, Figure 1). 454 Junior produced the longest reads, with a mean length of 522 bases, but

had the lowest throughput of the three instruments. Ion Torrent PGM runs generated over four
times the throughput of 454 Junior but generated the shortest reads (mean 121 bases). MiSeq

produced the greatest throughput with reads slightly longer than Ion Torrent PGM, permitting
the multiplexing of seven E. coli strains on a single run. MiSeq reads were paired-end: that

is, fragments were sequenced in both directions. Across the reference chromosome, coverage was
generally even although in the MiSeq data we saw a peak associated with the Shiga-toxin producing

phage, a smaller peak was detectable in the Ion Torrent PGM data (Supplementary Figure 3).

Diﬀerences in relative coverage levels were also seen in the pESBL and pAA plasmids between
instruments.

   Because each manufacturer uses a unique software implementation to generate base quality
score predictions, direct comparison of these scores between platforms is diﬃcult. We recalibrated

quality scores for each instrument by ﬁrst aligning reads to the reference genome. By observing the
counts of matched and mismatched bases in each aligned read a new quality score can be calculated



                                               3
(alignment quality, AQ). We used the scoring system of Ewing and Green which scores both

substitutions, insertions and deletions. Mismatches resulting in deletions are assigned randomly
to the position of one of the adjacent bases in the read. Alignment quality scores predicted in

this way generally had good agreement with predicted scores, with the Ion Torrent PGM generally

underestimating accuracy and the other instruments slightly overestimating (Figure 2). The MiSeq
produced the highest quality reads, due to a low substitution error rate and the near absence of

indel errors compared to the other platforms. The Ion Torrent PGM showed a steadily decreasing
accuracy across the read to 100 bases. The accuracy seems to improve after this point due to the

aligner soft-clipping trailing bases. Comparison of the frequency of indels through alignment to
the reference demonstrated Ion Torrent PGM reads had 1.5 indels per 100 bases (1.72 indels per

read). The 454 Junior had 0.38 indels per 100 bases (1.74 indels per read). In contrast, indels

were detected very infrequently in MiSeq data with <0.001 indels per 100 bases. These results
were conﬁrmed by alignment to two other reference genomes sequenced with other sequencing

technologies (see Supplementary Materials). As with 454 sequencing, the major source of indels in
Ion Torrent PGM data are runs of identical bases (homopolymers). Comparison of homopolymer

accuracy between Ion Torrent PGM and 454 Junior demonstrated that Ion Torrent PGM was less
accurate when calling homopolymers of any length (Figure 3). The dominant source of error were

deletions, with accuracy rates as low as 60% for homopolymers of length six or grater.


Comparison of de novo assemblies

The use of high-throughput sequencing for the discovery of diﬀerences in gene content and ar-

rangement relies on the generation of accurate de novo assemblies. We compared draft, de novo

assemblies from bench-top instruments using a variety of metrics. Assembly metrics such as to-
tal assembly size and N50 [14] give a guide to assembly completeness or fragmentation but not

accuracy. An ideal assembly produces a single accurate contig for each replicon but this is rarely
possible due to the presence of long repeat sequences. When comparing bench-top de novo as-

semblies we saw two major groupings of assembly quality. Heavily fragmented assemblies were
obtained from with Ion Torrent data (single runs or combined), 454 Junior (single runs) and MiSeq

contigs. Less heavily fragmented assemblies were obtained when reads from two 454 Junior runs

were combined to increase depth of coverage and when paired-end information was used to scaf-
fold contigs generated from the MiSeq data. However, runs of ambiguous bases were seen in the

scaﬀolded MiSeq assemblies, unlike the assemblies obtained from the 454 Junior data.
   The number of contigs that can be mapped unambiguously to the reference gives a measure

of genome coverage. Diﬀerences in genome coverage were seen when comparing assemblies from
each platform (Table 3). No platform delivered data that aligned unambiguously to 100% of the

reference. Contigs obtained from the 454 Junior data aligned to the largest proportion of the

reference, with 5.4% of the reference unmapped. This compared to 6.5% for Ion Torrent PGM
and 5.9% for MiSeq.

   The Ion Torrent PGM assemblies had large numbers of gaps (Figure 5), compared to as-
semblies obtained from 454 Junior and MiSeq data. Increasing sequence coverage by combining

assemblies from the two Ion Torrent PGM runs reduced the numbers of gaps in the assembly.
However this had little eﬀect on the miscalls in long homopolymeric tracts, so that even in this




                                               4
combined Ion Torrent PGM assembly, around 10% of the coding sequences (as predicted from the

reference assembly) were disrupted either by contig breaks or apparent frameshifts. Of the 1,864
gaps seen in the combined Ion Torrent PGM assembly around a quarter were due to gaps asso-

ciated with ends of contig or unmapped sequence, the rest being associated with homopolymeric

tracts. Manual inspection of assembly alignments revealed that many of the indels associated
with short homopolymeric tracts demonstrated strand bias, with the correct call predominantly

associated with either forward or reverse reads and the erroneous sequences associated with the
opposite strand (Supplementary Figure 2). While problems with homopolymers are known to

result from ﬂow-based chemistries, it is unclear why this strand bias should occur with Ion Tor-
rent technology. However, scrutiny of other public data sets from this instrument (http://mira-

assembler.sourceforge.net/docs/DeﬁnitiveGuideToMIRA.html) suggests it is a pervasive problem.


How useful are bench-top assemblies for public health microbiology?


A key test for a genome-sequencing technology is whether it can deliver trustworthy new insights
into the biology of the organism under scrutiny. We therefore evaluated how de novo assemblies

from each platform performed in reporting features of biological interest in the outbreak strain.
For some features, all platforms did well–for example all documented the presence and accurate

full-length sequence of the genes encoding the Shiga toxin type-2 subunits. However, at the
other extreme, all instruments did badly–for instance, in all assemblies the two larger plasmids

were broken into multiple contigs, which could not be readily assigned to chromosome or plasmid
without alignment to the reference genome.

   We used 31 protein sequences linked to pathogen biology as queries in translated BLAST

searches of the assemblies obtained from the bench-top sequencing platforms (Supplementary
Table 1 and Supplementary Files ??. No assembly contained a full set of full-length sequences.

The best MiSeq assembly captured 28/31 full-length sequences; the best 454 Junior assembly found
26 and the best Ion Torrent PGM assembly found 22. Perhaps the most challenging targets in the

survey were the four serine protease autotransporters encoded in the genome of the outbreak strain.
These genes code for multiple-domain proteins. None of the platforms managed to recover all four

genes as full-length fragments: the Ion Torrent PGM assembly recovered only one of them. This

is because the SPATEs are multiple-domain proteins and some domains exist as multiple copies
in the genome which are assembled into repeat consensus contigs which cannot be unambiguously

placed in the genome.
   Integration of whole-genome sequencing into existing practice in a public health laboratory re-

quires backwards compatibility with existing typing methods. We therefore attempted to generate
multi-locus sequence typing (MLST) proﬁles from each assembly. An accurate MLST proﬁle was

generated for the outbreak strain by the 454 Junior and MiSeq. However, all Ion Torrent PGM

assemblies generated indel errors in at least one housekeeping gene.











                                                5
Discussion


Sequencing and Public Health 2.0

In our evaluation, all three benchtop sequencing platforms generated useful draft genome sequences

of the German E. coli outbreak strain. All could be judged "ﬁt for purpose" in producing assem-
blies that mapped to 93% or more of the reference genome and recovered the vast majority of

coding sequences. However, no instrument could on its own generate completely accurate one-
contig-per-replicon assemblies that might equate to a ﬁnished genome. Thus, for each technology

there is a trade-oﬀ between advantages and disadvantages. In our survey, the MiSeq generated
the highest throughput per run and lowest error rate of the instruments, without signiﬁcant indel

or substitution errors (although accuracy does drop oﬀ toward the ends of reads). However, the

MiSeq delivered shorter read lengths, and thus worse assemblies, than the 454 Junior. Even with
paired-end sequencing, the single scaﬀold assemblies from the MiSeq are interrupted by unﬁllable

gaps, representing diﬃcult-to-resolve repeats. Furthermore, paired-end 150 base sequencing on
a pre-release instrument took over 27 hours (60 megabases per hour). The 454 Junior delivered

the longest read length but the lowest throughput (eight megabases per hour during a nine-hour
run) and suﬀered from errors in homopolymeric tracts, even at high coverage. The Ion Torrent

PGM produced intermediate throughput with the shortest reads and the worst performance with
homopolymers. However, it delivered the fastest throughput (80-100 megabases per hour) and

shortest run time (around 3 hours). This platform has also shown the greatest improvement in

performance in recent months-an assembly for the outbreak strain generated in May 2011 from
data from the original Ion Torrent 314 chip contained >3000 contigs [10], whereas, in this study,

data from the recently available 316 chip assembled into <600 contigs.
   Speed, set-up and running costs and ease of workﬂow are also important factors when com-

paring these platforms. However, as these may vary from one time or place to another and may
be subject to rapid changes, it is harder to make objective durable evaluations on these criteria.

Nonetheless, whatever the setting, the cost per base of generating sequence data appears to be an
order of magnitude higher for the 454 Junior than the other two platforms. The MiSeq workﬂow

has the fewest manual steps due to the bridge ampliﬁcation occurring on the instrument as the

initial step of sequencing, whereas Ion Torrent PGM and 454 GS Junior require a sequence-ready
library which has been ampliﬁed through emulsion PCR and subsequently enriched. All three

platforms have protocols for generating and sequencing long mate-pair libraries (templates with
ends a ﬁxed distance apart in the genome). Since this study was performed, a paired-end proto-

col for the Ion Torrent PGM has been announced similar to that on the MiSeq which requires a
second sequencing reaction to be carried out immediately after the ﬁrst which also has the eﬀect

of doubling the run-time (http://www.iontorrent.com/lib/images/PDFs/pe_appnote_v12b.pdf).
   One important conclusion from this evaluation is that saying that one has "sequenced a bac-

terial genome" means diﬀerent things on diﬀerent benchtop sequencing platforms. Potential users

of these technologies need to be sensitive to these diﬀerences, particularly when comparing or
combining data generated on diﬀerent platforms. Other important questions include how far can

errors be corrected by comparison to reference data, when is it safe to use a mapping approach
that makes assumptions that a novel sequence is like an existing reference sequence and how

much should one have to rely on human insight rather than automated analyses and pipelines?


                                               6
In this study, we set a tough test by evaluating algorithmically generated de novo assemblies.

However, during the real-world test case of the German E. coli outbreak, even the ﬁrst-generation

Ion Torrent platform, with its low throughput and high error-rate, delivered useful insights into
the biology and evolution of the outbreak strain [9, 10]. For example, a homopolymer error in

an MLST proﬁle was easily corrected by expert opinion. We are thus conﬁdent that benchtop
high-throughput sequencing platforms are poised to make a decisive impact on diagnostic and

public health microbiology in the near future.


Author contributions


N.J.L, J.W, S.G and M.J.P conceived the experiments, J.W. and S.G. supplied the strains, N.J.L,
R.M. and T.D. performed the bioinformatics analysis, C.C. performed the Ion Torrent sequencing,

S.G. and R.M. perfomed the 454 GS Junior sequencing. N.J.L. and M.J.P. wrote the manuscript.
All authors commented on the manuscript.



Accession codes


454 sequences have been deposited into the Short Read Archive under study number SRA048574,
with run accessions SRR388806 (454 GS Junior run 1), SRR388807 (454 GS Junior run 2),

SRR388808 (454 FLX+), SRR388809 (454 Titanium 8kb paired-end). Ion Torrent PGM sequences
have been deposited under study number SRA048511, with accessions SRR389193 (Ion Torrent

PGM run 1), SRR389194 (Ion Torrent PGM run 2). The multiplexed MiSeq reads have been de-
posited under study number SRA048664. Assembly ﬁles and analysis scripts have been uploaded

to a public Github repository (https://github.com/nickloman/benchtop-sequencing-comparison).


Acknowledgements


We gratefully acknowledge the blogging community for helpful discussion in the comments sec-
tion of our blog (http://pathogenomics.bham.ac.uk/blog), and in particular to Bastien Chevreux,

Justin Johnson, Keith Robison and Lex Nederbragt. We are grateful to Colin Hercus at Novocraft

for help with the Novoalign software and to Aaron Darling for help with Mauve Assembly Met-
rics. We thank Roche Diagnostics, UK for 454 GS FLX+ and 454 FLX paired-end sequencing,

technical support and helpful discussion. We thank Life Technologies for early access to 316 chips
and instrument ﬂuidics upgrade. We thank Geoﬀ Smith and Illumina UK for early access to the

MiSeq platform and public release of E. coli outbreak strain data.













                                            7
Tables





























































                                       8
         r
         o     3  3 .
         r     3  3 3
         p        3 3
n sr n   e  3          5
e  t r   a  4          5
r  a e   a
s  a t   e
I  i k   M
s  w n   e     5
r  r c   a     2  2 .
i  r u   a     $  $ $
e  l e   e             .
s  A e   r  2          $         .
a  D p   p  $                    2
/  i a   s     s                 0
i  m e   C     u rs r            y
n  e o         h  o o            a
o  g d   e  s  3  h 3  r         b
c  t a   t  u     3    o         F
e  e p   u  h          7         s   s
t  m m   R  8          2         2   e
b ra s                           e   s
r  l n   t     )  ) )            s   s
v  i s   n     s  e s            c   i
y in m   l     b  b b            ,   a
m  h s   a  )  0 0  0            m   o
g  t a   (  s  (  ( (            .   u
c in s   t  b  b *  b  b         e   e
p ra b   p  0  0  b 0  0         r   p
t  n e   u  (  1  0 0  5         v   a
o  g m   r  b     1 1  1         .   s
.  o e   t  5                 .  w   E
n  s t   m  3                 [  w   c  i
r  c o   m                    o  e   o k
n  d .   i                    t  s   e  i
c lc d   M                    e  e   O ra
u ni u         i  i )         l  w   d  p
e ot d   u     c  c h         p  o   a  r
s  n h   r     4  6 c  e      s  r   c  e
a  d e   p     (  ( 3  a      n te   o  p
s  e m   s    3   2 (  0      n  S e T  a
e cr o   c  0 52  ( 6  1      o  U   n  d
m  e i   t  1 $   4 $  x      t  e   r  a
t  p n   m  $     $    (      m  r   v  i
i  a p   o             5      r  v   s  c
p  S d   p             $      i  I   ,  e
-  t 0   A    2               n  m   G  u  y
c  r -         0              t  f   P cl  t
e  n 5   c  0  4       0      m  g   n  s  s
f oc n   p  ,  8       ,      o  c   r  c  h
o  i e   s  0  $       2      i  p   T  p  n
s  r e   L  $          $      g  M   n  M  d
a  s b        1               i  G   I  G  s
p  d o                        p  t   d  t  n
o uc o      i  M              d  e   l  e  t
e  i l   r  u  P       q      t  o   i  o  r
r  o n   t  J  n       i      s  T   c  T  g
P  n t   l  G  r       M      s  o   r  o  n
1  d d   P  4  T              n  )   ) I)  C
l es a      4  n              U (1   (  (  *
a ri a         I
T p (


                                          9
e  c
n  e       )
u  q       (
s  s       e
c  h       i           9         9
e  n    e  a   9 9  9  8         9
f  r    r ds
r  e    v  e
h  i    c  R
t  M    n  s
n  h    m  i
g tr .  g am           0         6
a  F i  l  p   6 3  .  . -       5
e  n r  A  g   5 5  5  4         6
m li s     a
i ha l     L
a ic c     e
o  w E     o
l sd       o   0 4  0  3         1
s  e       o . 1 1  6  9 -       2
r  f       h   1 1  4  3     a   2
a  e       C                 a
e  a       .                 q
w  e       .                 i
a cr n     (             )   M
n pe e     t   6 7  1  6 2   e   2
o  h s     e   ( (  (  ( 1   e   (
s  h t     n   2 2  2  2 1   i   1
r ti g     e   5 5  1  1     u
n  n x     M                 m
r  w p                       D
g  s l     t
c  r m     e
e  a e     l   8 6  3  2 5       5
q  i f     d   5 5  1  1 1       1
s  s s     M
c la l
e  e e     s             0
f rg e     a   6 6  7  4 ,       6
c  l t     b   , ,  ,  7 2       6
t  w a     t   9 1  5  , 2       ,
e  d e     T   0 1  3  6 6       5
.  a w         7 7  3  2 1       2
l  e a                   6
s  s u     s   2 8  8  7 1       1
r  o r     e   , , ,8 ,4 8       6
n  r t     R   3 3  8  1 ,       7
n  c e         1 1 ,2 ,2 1       1
u  e e
e  t t         ) )  1
p  f f         ( (  (  2         0
t  g n         o o  M  t 1       2
c  r o     u   n n  P  e q       i
e  o s     R   J J  n  o S       r
B  f a         S S  r  T M       .
2  o s         4 4  T  o         .
l  t t         4 4  n  I
a  e e              I
T D m


                                         10
o  e i
t  t n
a  t c
t  s t
r  o u
ﬀ i rd    S
d  b h    D
r  a e    n   1 6     7 4  6 4  6
h  u t    k   1 1  8  5 6  5 1  1
g  e e    r
i  g m    B
c ia r    s
d  b e    a
i  t o    b
l  n m    b   4 5     8 9  5    7
b  c o    p   4 8  3  7 9  9 0  0
s  h w    a   6 6  5  6 6  . 5 9.
a  h o    n                6    5
i  w n    u
e  i i    %
t tn p
t  c e    b
p  o a    e
o  f c    s           1 3  8
e  r h    n   4 5  7  8 8  4 2  3
m as e    s        2  1 1  1    3
n  a n    a
h b  e    G
o  b r    e
t  p e    n
a  a t    e
r  m i    r   0 3     1 5    4
t  U e    i   3 4  1  4 4  3 2 34
o .e e    s
k mouq    a
e e  s    G
B  e n    s
y  n d    i
l  r c    p
u  e o    a   3 1  3  1 4  1 9  1
d  e e    r
a  t m    B
c  o n             0            8
t  r e    5   0 2  0  8 1  3 1  6
m  p t    N   5 3  1  5 5  5 4  1
l  t i             1       5    1
b er D    i
s iﬀ C    n   6 1  6  5 8  7 1 05
a  d e    C   3 4  2  5 5  5 6  5
o  t o
o  g B  s          )       )    )
r  a e  o     1 2  2  1 2  + g ld
p  i m  e e   r r (1  t t  ( t  ﬀ
o  o e  e a   i i  o  r r  n c  c
C  c g  i N   J J  n o or  r q  (
3  m n  r     4 4  J  T T  T S  e
l  s r  s     4 4  5  I I  n M  i
a  h e  n          4       I    M
T t r e


                                         11
List of ﬁgures





























































                                        12
                                          454 GS Junior 1+2                                                                                            Ion Torrent PGM 1+2                                                                                             MiSeq (280 strain)



     40                                                                                                             40                                                                                                            40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ●●●● ●●●●●●●●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●●●●●●●●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ● ●●●        ●●●●●● ●●
             ●                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ● ●●●●
              ●●●●                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ●●
              ●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●                                                                                                                                                                                                    ●●                    ●●●
                     ●●●●●● ●●●   ● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●●
                                                 ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●                                                                                                                                                                                                     ●●
                                                       ●●●●●●●●●●                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●●●
                                                           ●●●●●●●●●                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●●●●●●●●●●
                                                               ●●●●                                                                                                                                                                                                            ●●●●●●
                                                                 ●●●                                                                                                                                                                      ●●                                         ●●●●●●●●●●
                                                                  ●●●●                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●●●●●
                                                                    ●●●                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ●●●●●●   ●●
                                                                     ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ●● ●●●●
     30                                                                 ●●●●●                                       30                                                                                                            30
                                                                         ●●●●●●●●●●
                                                                           ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●


                                                                              ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●
                                                                                  ●●●●●




                                                                                   ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●
                                                                                       ●●●●●●●●                             ●
                                                                                         ●●●●●●●●●●                         ●
                                                                                           ●●●●●●●●                          ●
                                                                                             ●●●●●                            ●●●●●●●
     20                                                                                        ●●●●●                20             ●●●●●●●●●●●●                                                                                   20
                                                                                                 ●●●●●                                        ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●
                                                                                                 ● ●                                                    ●●●●●●●●●
    mean                                                                                           ●               mean                                      ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●                                                      mean
                                                                                                    ●                                                                ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●
                                                                                                                                                                              ●●●●●
                                                                                                    ●●                                                                          ●●●●
                                                                                                    ●●                                                                             ●●
                                                                                                    ●                                                                               ●                          ●●
                                                                                                    ●                                                                                ●●                       ●
                                                                                                                                                                                      ●                       ●
                                                                                                                                                                                       ●●                   ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                        ●●                ●●●
                                                                                                                                                                                         ●●●       ●● ●●●● ●●
                                                                                                                                                                                            ●●●●●●●●●
     10                                                                                                             10                                                                                                            10







                                                                                                                                                                                                                ●●●●●●●●







       0                                                                                                             0                                                                                                             0




             0            100            200           300            400            500           600                      0                    50                   100                   150                  200                      0                    50                   100                   150                   200

                                                   position                                                                                                      position                                                                                                      position






                                          454 GS Junior 1+2                                                                                            Ion Torrent PGM 1+2                                                                                             MiSeq (280 strain)





                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1200000

                                                                                                                    200000







                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1000000


     3000


                                                                                                                    150000



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   800000








     2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   600000
                                                                                                                    100000
    count                                                                                                          count                                                                                                         count








                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   400000



     1000
                                                                                                                     50000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   200000









         0                                                                                                                0                                                                                                               0




                0           100            200           300           400           500           600                          0                   50                  100                  150                  200                           0                   50                 100                  150                 200

                                                    length                                                                                                        length                                                                                                        length





                                          454 GS Junior 1+2                                                                                            Ion Torrent PGM 1+2                                                                                             MiSeq (strain 280)




     100                                                                                                            100                                                                                                           100











       99                                                                                                            99                                                                                                            99












       98                                                                                                            98                                                                                                            98










    accuracy                                                                                                       accuracy                                                                                                      accuracy
       97                                                                                                            97                                                                                                            97












       96                                                                                                            96                                                                                                            96











       95                                                                                                            95                                                                                                            95




              0            100            200           300           400            500           600                       0                    50                  100                   150                  200                       0                    50                   100                  150                   200

                                               Base Position                                                                                                 Base Position                                                                                                  Base Position






                                          454 GS Junior 1+2                                                                                            Ion Torrent PGM 1+2                                                                                             MiSeq (strain 280)



     100                                                                                                            100                                                                                                           100












       80                                                                                                            80                                                                                                            80











       60                                                                                                            60                                                                                                            60











    % aligned                                                                                                      % aligned                                                                                                     % aligned
       40                                                                                                            40                                                                                                            40











       20                                                                                                            20                                                                                                            20












        0                                                                                                             0                                                                                                             0




              0            100            200           300           400            500           600                       0                    50                  100                   150                  200                       0                    50                   100                  150                   200

                                                     pos                                                                                                           pos                                                                                                            pos



















Figure 1: Evaluation of read length and quality from bench-top sequencers. Row A) Boxplots






showing the predicted per-base quality score for combined sequencing runs for each bench-top





instrument at each read position created by the qrqc package. Grey lines indicate the 10% and 90%






quantiles, orange lines indicate the lower and upper quartiles, the blue dot is the median, and the






green dash the mean. A purple smooth curve is ﬁt through the distributions [15]. Quality scores are
                                                                                                                                                       13




given as Phred-scaled quality values where Q = −10 log                                                                                                                                     P (P being the probability of the base
                                                                                                                                                                                   10





call being correct). Row B) Histograms showing read lengths produced by each instrument. Row





B) Comparison of the predicted and measured accuracy for each benchtop sequencer. Predicted






accuracy is determined by multiplying the number of alignments of bases of each quality score by


                                                                                                                                            −Q


                                                                                                                                             10
the probability of an incorrect base call (10                                                                                                        ). Row C) The percentage of reads aligned at any






given position.
     99.99

                                                                                ●
                                                                             ●  ● ●
                                                                      ●●●     ●
                                                                   ●       ●
                                                                     ●
                                                                 ●              ●
                                                                ●
                                                            ●                 ●
                                                              ●
                                                                             ●
                                                                           ●
                                                       ●
                                                                          ●
                                                         ● ●   ●
                                                      ●
                                                                        ●
       99.9                                      ●  ●         ●
                                                                      ●
                                                            ●        ●
                                                                                       Number of base calls
                                                          ●      ● ●
                                               ●                ●
                                                   ●     ●                               ●  1e+07
                                                              ●
                                            ●               ●
                                                       ●                                 ●  2e+07
                                                     ●
                                         ●    ●            ●
                                                    ●    ●                              ● 3e+07

                                                  ●    ●
                                          ●           ●                                 ●   4e+07
                                                ●   ●
                                               ●
        99.                                        ●                                    ●   5e+07
                                     ●       ●
                                       ●
                                    ●       ●                                               6e+07
                                 ●●            ● ●                                      ●
                                          ●
                                        ●     ●
     Accuracy (%)                           ●
                                     ● ●                                               Platform

                                         ●●
                                   ●                                                     ●  454 GS Junior 1+2
                             ● ●
                                       ●
                                ● ●  ●                                                   ●  Ion Torrent PGM 1+2
                             ● ●
                            ●       ●
                          ●      ●●                                                      ●  MiSeq (280)
        90.                ●
                          ●
                        ●
                        ●














         0.





                0              10               20              30               40

                  Bin of predicted quality score (phred−scale)







Figure 2: Chart showing the relationship between predicted quality scores and measured base


accuracy. The area of each point shows the number of aligned bases in the predicted quality score

bin. The diagonal slope indicates the relationship between base quality scores and accuracy.


















                                                       14
           454 GS Junior 1+2 (deletions)               454 GS Junior 1+2 (insertions)
        1.0                                          1.0



        0.8                                          0.8



        0.6                                          0.6



        0.4                                          0.4



        0.2                                          0.2
       Frequency of deletion errors                 Frequency of insertion error
                                                                                                   Homopolymer
                                                                                                   Length
        0.0                                          0.0
                                                                                                       1
             0     20    40    60    80    100            0     20    40    60    80    100            2
                     Read position                                Read position
                                                                                                       3

                                                                                                       4
          Ion Torrent PGM 1+2 (deletions)             Ion Torrent PGM 1+2 (insertions)                 5

        1.0                                          1.0                                               6

                                                                                                       7

        0.8                                          0.8                                               >= 8



        0.6                                          0.6



        0.4                                          0.4



       Frequency of deletion errors                 Frequency of insertion error


        0.0                                          0.0


             0     20    40    60    80    100            0     20    40    60    80    100
                     Read position                                Read position
















Figure 3: Comparison of homopolymer tract accuracy between 454 Junior and Ion Torrent. Charts
show the frequency of erroneous insertions or deletions associated with homopolymeric tracts in

the reference genome of lengths 1-7, and 8 or greater.



                                                          15
    120000





                                                                   ●
    100000




                                                           ●●
     80000



                                                                         Assembler
                                                                          ●  CLC
     60000
                                                                             MIRA
   N50
                                                                             Newbler
                                                                             Velvet

     40000                   ●●




                      ●
     20000
              ●●

                                     ●      ●●      ●






        454 Jun 4ior (u)nior (2)Ion ToIentT(1r)rent (2)
                      454 Junior (1+2)      Ion Torrent (1+MiSeq (scaffolds)
                                 Assembly



Figure 4: This plot shows N50 values from assemblies generated from sequence data for each se-
quencing platform. A selection of popular assembly software has been used. The N50 is calculated

from the total genome length of the E. coli strain 280 reference sequence, rather than the sum
total of contig lengths.












                                          16
     a                   Assembly gap                        b     454 Junior (1)454 Junior (2)454 Junior (1+2)

                                                             800
     1500



                                                             600
     1000


                                                             400

      500


                                                             200
        0

                       Homopolymer gap

                                                               0

     1500                                                          Ion Torrent (1Ion Torrent (2Ion Torrent (1+2)
    Count                                                   Count
                                                             800

     1000

                                                             600


      500

                                                             400


        0

                                                             200




               454 JuniorJu(1n)ior (2) Ion TrrnenTto(r1re)nt (2)
                        454 Junior (1+2)igs)    Ion Torrent (1+2)
                                  MiSeq (scaffolds)               2 4 6 8 10     2 4 6 8 10    2 4 6 8 10
                       Assembly                                           Homopolymer length



Figure 5: An analysis of gaps when aligning draft de novo assemblies to the reference genome.

A - top panel) The number of gaps which are not associated with homopolymeric tracts, e.g.

contig breaks, misassemblies, missing sequence. A - bottom panel) The number of gaps which are
associated with homopolymeric tracts for each draft assembly. B) The length of erroneously called

homopolymeric tracts for each 454 Junior and Ion Torrent assembly.

















                                                       17
Methods

Collection of isolates


Five UK isolates, all with epidemiological links to the German outbreak were included in the
study, with strain 280 being sequenced by each of the bench-top instruments (Supplementary

Table ??). Two E. coli O104 isolates were not linked to the German outbreak and were included
as comparators. Isolates were grown according to the protocol described in Chattaaway et al [13].

To generate enough DNA for sequencing, isolates were grown on multiple occasions.


Sequencing workﬂow

A general, simpliﬁed workﬂow for library preparation, ampliﬁcation and sequencing is shown

(Supplementary Figure 1) with approximate timings for each stage. These stages comprise library
preparation from genomic DNA, ampliﬁcation and sequencing. Library preparation steps are

similar for each instrument, involving extraction and puriﬁcation of genomic DNA, fragmentation
through either enzymatic or physical means, fragment size selection and ligation of sequencing

adapters.


Ion Torrent Sequencing

Ion Torrent sequencing was performed at the University of Birmingham according to the Ion

Torrent protocol (Life Technologies, Gaithersburg, MD). Total DNA from E. coli O104:H4 280
was isolated. 10µg of this DNA was fragmented with a Bioruptor instrument (Diagenode, LiŁge,

Belgium) using the protocol recommended by Life Technologies. A broad proﬁle of fragment sizes
(75-500 bp, peak at 255 bp) were obtained which were end-repaired, ligated with Ion Torrent A

and P1 adapters and size selected using E-Gel EX 2% Gel (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) for 150-250
bp fragments. The size-selected fragments were ampliﬁed and DNA was puriﬁed with Agencourt

AMPure XP beads (Beckman Coulter Genomics, High Wycombe, UK). The median fragment size
of the ﬁnal library was 200 bp (assessed by a BioAnalyzer High Sensitivity LabChip, Agilent).

Library was diluted to 40pM and two emulsion PCR reactions were set up at two templates per
sphere. Sequencing primer and polymerase were added to the ﬁnal enriched spheres prior to

loading onto the 316 chip. Two 316 chips were run in total. Base calls were generated using
version 1.5 of the Ion Torrent software suite and for further analysis the resulting ﬂowgram ﬁles

(assembly) or FASTQ ﬁles (alignment) were used.


454 Junior Sequencing

454 Junior sequencing was performed on an instrument at the Health Protection Agency, Colindale,

UK. E. coli O104:H4 280 DNA was prepared following the Roche Rapid Library protocol (Roche,
Welwyn Garden City, UK), whereby 5ng/µl was taken from each sample and libraries prepared.

Brieﬂy, samples were subjected to the following key steps: DNA fragmentation by nebulization,
fragment end-repair, AMPure XP bead preparation (Amersham International, Buckinghamshire,

UK), adaptor ligation, small fragment removal, quality assessment using the Agilent 2100 Bio-
analyzer, library quantitation and ﬁnally preparation of working aliquots at a ﬁnal concentration



                                            18
of 1 × 10 molecules/µl (500ng total). Emulsions PCR, enrichment and 454 GS Junior sequenc-

ing were carried out as per manufacturer’s protocols. The resulting ﬂowgram ﬁles were used for
downstream analysis.



454 GS FLX+ and 454 GS FLX 8kb Titanium sequencing

454 GS FLX 8kb Titanium paired-end and 454 FLX+ (long read) library construction and se-

quencing was performed at Roche Diagnostics (Burgess Hill, UK) according to their standard
protocols.


Illumina MiSeq Sequencing


Illumina MiSeq sequencing was performed at Illumina UK, Little Chesterford, UK, on a pre-
release, prototype MiSeq instrument. The seven E. coli samples were quantiﬁed with a Qubit

High Sensitivity kit and the total amount of DNA for each sample varied between 523ng and
954ng. Samples were sheared with Covaris followed by end repair, A-tailing and the ligation of

Truseq adapters containing indexes. Samples were run on a 2% agarose gel (2 samples per gel)
and DNA was size selected at 600-700 bp. 10 cycles of PCR were carried out and samples run

out on a second 2% agarose gel (2 samples per gel). Samples were excised from the gel and

quantiﬁed with a Qubit high sensitivity kit. Libraries were diluted to 2nM in EB+0.1% tween
and a pool containing an equimolar concentration of each library was prepared. MiSeq instrument

was prepared following routine procedures. Brieﬂy, a standard MiSeq ﬂowcell was inserted into
the ﬂowcell chamber. Next, the DNA sample containing the pool of seven E. coli libraries was

diluted to 6.2pmol and pipetted into the sample well on the MiSeq Consumable Cartridge before
loading in the chiller section of the MiSeq instrument. A sample sheet was prepared on the MiSeq

instrument to provide run details. The run was initiated for 2x151 bases of SBS sequencing,

including on-board clustering and paired-end preparation, the sequencing of the seven barcode
indices, and analysis. On the completion of the run, data was basecalled and demultiplexed on

the instrument (provided as Illumina FASTQ ﬁles, phred+64 encoding). FASTQ format ﬁles in
Illumina 1.5 format were considered for downstream analaysis. Although MiSeq produces reads of

ﬁxed lengths, tails of these reads may be designated as uncallable as indicated by the read segment
quality control indicator, noted a quality score of two (’B’). In these cases these low quality tails

were trimmed and not used for further analysis.


Bioinformatics


Construction of reference assembly

A high-quality reference sequence for E. coli strain 280 was constructed by assembling 454 FLX+
long read data and 454 Titanium paired-end data (8kb insert) using Newbler 2.6. Newbler was run

with parameters -scaffold -tr -cpu 8 -siom 28 -rip. The resulting scaﬀolds were used for

further analysis. Newbler masks certain bases in the assembly regarded as uncertain by assigning
it a lower-case nucleotide. These masked bases correspond with bases with a low quality score.

In bacterial genomes these bases are seen predominantly in consensus contigs resulting from long
repeat regions, long homopolymeric tracts and contig ends. The resulting assembly was annotated



                                              19
using the automated xBASE annotation pipeline [16] which utilises Glimmer for coding sequence

prediction [17] and tRNAScan-SE and RNAmmer for stable RNA prediction [18, 19].


De novo assembly of individual strains

Assemblies were generated from data generated by each of the bench-top sequencing platforms sep-

arately. All data were assembled by MIRA 3.4.0 using default parameters in genome,denovo,accurate
mode and the appropriate setting for each instrument type (454,iontor,solexa). Ion Torrent

and 454 Junior data were additionally assembled with Newbler 2.6 with default parameters. Il-
lumina MiSeq data were additionally assembled using Velvet and CLC Assembly Cell (both de

Bruijn graph assemblers). Velvet was run using a k-mer value of 55 and exp_cov and cov_cutoff
set to auto. The program was run again with -scaffolding off to generate a separate assem-

bly without scaﬀolds. CLC Assembly Cell version 4.0.6 beta was run with default parameters.

De novo assemblies were compared for chromosomal coverage, broken genes, etc. using Mauve
(mauve_snapshot_2011-08-19) and the Mauve Assembly Metrics package [20]. Assemblies were

manually examined using the Tablet viewer [21].


Read mapping

For substitution and indel detection, reads from each platform were aligned to the reference assem-

bly using the bwasw module of BWA (version 0.5.9rc1) [22]. The reference genome was indexed
with bwa index -a is. Bwasw was run with default parameters (gap open penalty 5, gap ex-

tension penalty 2) using FASTQ ﬁles as input. Output BAM ﬁles were post-processed using
the calmd module of samtools which adds MD tags to each alignment. The MD tag describes

the positions of base substitutions. Reads which align to masked bases in the reference genome
were excluded from analysis. Read group information was added to the output BAM ﬁles using

Picard (http://picard.sourceforge.net/). Read accuracy was determined a custom Python script

(calculate_accuracy.py, available in the Github repository) which utilises the pysam module
(http://code.google.com/p/pysam/) to read the BAM alignment. The calculate_accuracy script

counts mismatches using the method of Ewing and Green [23] which counts mismatches resulting
from substitutions, insertions and deletions. In the case of deletions, mismatches are assigned to

one of the adjacent reads in the alignment at random. Depth of coverage reports were gener-
ated using DepthOfCoverage module of GATK [24]. Reads were additionally mapped against E.

coli strain c236-11 (PacBio and Illumina sequenced) and E. coli strain 55989 (Sanger sequenced)
[12][25].

   For generation of homopolymer accuracy plots reads for each of the bench-top sequencing

platforms were mapped to the reference assembly using Novoalign (version V2.07.13, Novocraft,
Malaysia, registered version). Gap penalties were adjusted with parameters as recommended by

the documentation -g 20 -x 5. Novoalign was set to align its maximum supported read length
of 300 using -n 300. Homopolymeric tract statistics were enabled using the –hpstats option.

Quality score recalibration was enabled using the -K option. Only reads that aligned without
indels and with a mapping quality of greater than 60 were included in quality score recalibration.






                                              20
References


 1.  Pallen, M. J., Nelson, K. & Preston, G. M. Bacterial Pathogenomics (ASM Press, 2007).

 2.  Metzker, M. Sequencing technologies - the next generation. Nat Rev Genet 11, 31–46 (2010).

 3.  Glenn, T. Field guide to next-generation DNA sequencers. Mol Ecol Resour 11, 759–69
     (2011).

 4.  Pallen, M., Loman, N. & Penn, C. High-throughput sequencing and clinical microbiology:

     progress, opportunities and challenges. Curr Opin Microbiol 13, 625–31 (2010).

 5.  Rothberg, J. et al. An integrated semiconductor device enabling non-optical genome sequenc-

     ing. Nature 475, 348–52 (2011).

 6.  Bentley, D. et al. Accurate whole human genome sequencing using reversible terminator
     chemistry. Nature 456, 53–9 (2008).

 7.  Frank, C. et al. Epidemic proﬁle of Shiga-toxin-producing Escherichia coli O104:H4 outbreak

     in Germany. N Engl J Med 365, 1771–80 (2011).

 8.  Brzuszkiewicz, E. et al. Genome sequence analyses of two isolates from the recent Escherichia
     coli outbreak in Germany reveal the emergence of a new pathotype: Entero-Aggregative-

     Haemorrhagic Escherichia coli (EAHEC). Arch Microbiol 193, 883–91 (2011).

 9.  Mellmann, A. et al. Prospective genomic characterization of the German enterohemorrhagic
     Escherichia coli O104:H4 outbreak by rapid next generation sequencing technology. PLoS

     One 6, e22751 (2011).

10.  Rohde, H. et al. Open-source genomic analysis of Shiga-toxin-producing E. coli O104:H4. N
     Engl J Med 365, 718–24 (2011).

11.  Rasko, D. et al. Origins of the E. coli strain causing an outbreak of hemolytic-uremic syn-

     drome in Germany. N Engl J Med 365, 709–17 (2011).

12.  Grad, Y. et al. Genomic epidemiology of the Escherichia coli O104:H4 outbreaks in Europe,

     2011. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 109, 3065–70 (2012).

13.  Chattaway, M., Dallman, T., Okeke, I. & Wain, J. Enteroaggregative E. coli O104 from an
     outbreak of HUS in Germany 2011, could it happen again? J Infect Dev Ctries 5, 425–36

     (2011).

14.  Kingsford, C., Schatz, M. & Pop, M. Assembly complexity of prokaryotic genomes using short
     reads. BMC Bioinformatics 11, 21 (2010).

15.  Buﬀalo, V. qrqc: Quick Read Quality Control R package version 1.9.1 <http://bioinformatics.

     ucdavis.edu> (2012).

16.  Chaudhuri, R. et al. xBASE2: a comprehensive resource for comparative bacterial genomics.
     Nucleic Acids Res 36 (2008).

17.  Delcher, A., Bratke, K., Powers, E. & Salzberg, S. Identifying bacterial genes and endosym-

     biont DNA with Glimmer. Bioinformatics 23, 673–9 (2007).

18.  Lowe, T. & Eddy, S. tRNAscan-SE: a program for improved detection of transfer RNA genes
     in genomic sequence. Nucleic Acids Res 25, 955–64 (1997).



                                                21
19.  Lagesen, K. et al. RNAmmer: consistent and rapid annotation of ribosomal RNA genes.

     Nucleic Acids Res 35, 3100–8 (2007).

20.  Darling, A., Tritt, A., Eisen, J. & Facciotti, M. Mauve assembly metrics. Bioinformatics 27,

     2756–7 (2011).

21.  Milne, I. et al. Tablet–next generation sequence assembly visualization. Bioinformatics 26,
     401–2 (2010).

22.  Li, H. & Durbin, R. Fast and accurate long-read alignment with Burrows-Wheeler transform.

     Bioinformatics 26, 589–95 (2010).

23.  Ewing, B. & Green, P. Base-calling of automated sequencer traces using phred. II. Error
     probabilities. Genome Res 8, 186–94 (1998).

24.  McKenna, A. et al. The Genome Analysis Toolkit: a MapReduce framework for analyzing

     next-generation DNA sequencing data. Genome Res 20, 1297–303 (2010).

25.  Touchon, M. et al. Organised genome dynamics in the Escherichia coli species results in

     highly diverse adaptive paths. PLoS Genet 5, e1000344 (2009).














































                                                22
Supplement


Supplementary Tables





















































                                 23
             l
f  o n       ﬀ
r  e s     e c
t  b b     i s                   2      3
i  u (     M g   2  6 1 /     /  /  7   5
g  e S       n      6    2 4  2  1  7   3
d  t L       c             3
h  w B                                  8
a  h i       2   /  6 / 2     /  /  7   5
s ss o       1   2  6 1 /2    2  1  7   3
r  u c     n (             3
w  r n     r     4    1          2      3
e  e d     T (   1  / 1  /    1  /  /   2
n  T a     o        6    2 4     8  5
u .) c     I               3            3
s ge e       1   1  6 0 /2    /  1  7   5
g  k q       (      5    0 4  2  8  6   2
d caes                     3            8
c  2 i       2   /  6 / 2     2  1  7   /
i  2 o       1   1  6 0 /2    2  8  6   2
o  2 c     o (             /
P  T n     n     4    1    1     2      3
s A he     J (   3  / 0  /    2  2  /   3
l  L s     5        6    0 4     1  7
m  e c     4               3     2      3
s  t e       1   2  6 0 2/    /  /  7   9
a  o e       (      6    0    2  1  6   2
a tr s                     3            8
d p  S           /  6 /  2    2  1  7   /
s  n L           1  5 0 /0    2  2  7   2
a  a r                     /     1
a  b F                     2
n (t l
t ST b                     s
r  A s                     T
t  B a                     P
a  e c                     (
o  a r                     a
p  n f                     c
i  r r              e    s r        e
l  g t              e    e c  t  c  e
i  s i              e    t b  n  a  g
l  u c           n  n i  a e ub  i  i   l
f te e           e  s o  e n s   r  e   t
s m  q           d  e i  t f  x  m  e   T
c  t s           A  c M  r o  t  i  u
a ns h              t    s e  g  l  h
m  p o              b    0 o  h  T  T
c  - l              n    O s  S     L
n hc i              A      a        M
d ne e                     o
h  b i                     u
g  a r                     e
l  e h                     a
l  f i                     o
F  e w  .                  p
1  b e  s                  e
l  e t  u                  r
a  s a  a                  S
T a m w


                                         24
   Table 2: Indel summary for benchtop reads against E. coli 280 - 454 + Illumina reference



                        insertions  deletions  indels_per_100    indels_per_read    total_reads
    454 GS Junior (1)      176502      62427               0.38               1.75       136876
  454 GS Junior (1+2)      354946     121344               0.38               1.74       275437
    454 GS Junior (2)      178444      58917               0.38               1.72       138561

 Illumina MiSeq (280)         657       1828               0.00               0.00      1769608
       Ion Torrent (1)    1905499    1886049               1.45               1.68      2484481
    Ion Torrent (1+2)     3535011    3687275               1.50               1.72      4639731
       Ion Torrent (2)    1629512    1801226               1.56               1.77      2155250





 Table 3: Indel summary for benchtop reads against E. coli 55989 (Sanger sequenced) reference



                        insertions  deletions  indels_per_100    indels_per_read    total_reads
    454 GS Junior (1)      162292      56866               0.37               1.71       137457
  454 GS Junior (1+2)      327199     110863               0.37               1.70       276545

    454 GS Junior (2)      164907      53997               0.37               1.69       139088
 Illumina MiSeq (280)        2598       5128               0.01               0.01      1772571
       Ion Torrent (1)    1720816    1699829               1.44               1.66      2485113
    Ion Torrent (1+2)     3195610    3326520               1.49               1.71      4640859

       Ion Torrent (2)    1474794    1626691               1.55               1.76      2155746




Table 4: Indel summary for benchtop reads against E. coli c236-11 - Illumina + PacBio reference



                        insertions  deletions  indels_per_100    indels_per_read    total_reads
    454 GS Junior (1)      175391      62434               0.38               1.75       137059
  454 GS Junior (1+2)      352620     121470               0.38               1.73       275821

    454 GS Junior (2)      177229      59036               0.38               1.72       138762
 Illumina MiSeq (280)         909       5338               0.00               0.00      1771145
       Ion Torrent (1)    1898486    1879639               1.45               1.68      2484567
    Ion Torrent (1+2)     3522207    3674905               1.50               1.72      4639926

       Ion Torrent (2)    1623721    1795266               1.56               1.77      2155359



   Supplementary Excel File 1. Assembly_comparison_supplemental.xlsx

   Supplementary Excel File 2. Assembly_summary_supplemental.xlsx
   Supplementary Excel File 3. BLAST_searches.xlsx













                                              25
Supplementary Figures





                                         Genomic DNA

                                 Enzymatic          Mechanical
                               fragmentation      fragmentation


                             Size selection, clean-up, adaptor ligation


                                                         4 - 8 hours



                        Emulsion PCR
                                                                Cluster
                                  2 hours                     generation


                       Bead recovery,                                 1 hour and
                         enrichment                                   20 minutes

                                       3-5 hours


                    Ion Torrent         454 GS Junior        Illumina MiSeq

                    Sequencing           Sequencing           Sequencing

                      3 hours              9 hours            2 – 26 hours



                     Figure 1: Simpliﬁed workﬂow for bench-top sequencing






























                                                26
Figure 2: Homopolymeric tract error demonstrating strand bias (light blue is forward strand, dark








blue is reverse strand)








































                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●
                                            ●                                                                                                                                       ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●
                                                                                                                                                                                    ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●                    ●●●


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ●
                                                      ●                                                            ●
                                          0'                                                                         ●        2000000                                                                                         4000000                                                                ●     3'
                                                                                                                   ●●●●●●                                                       ●                                                      ●                   ●
                                                      ●                                                            ●●●●●                                                                                                                                   ●
                                                                      ●●      1000000     ●                        ●●●                                                        3000000                                                                                         5000000
                                                      ●               ●                                            ●●●●                                                                                                                 ●
                       100                             ●                                                           ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●                                            ●                                          ●
                                                                                                                   ●●●●●●                                                                                                             ●                    ●
                                                                                                                   ● ●
                                                                       ●                                           ●●●●●●●●●●●                                                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                                   ●●●●●●                                                                                                                                  ●
                                            ●                ●                                                     ●●●●                                                                                            ●                   ●
                                                      ●                                                             ●●●●●                                                                                                                                                                            ●
                                            ●          ●    ●                                                      ●●●●●●                                                                                                                                  ●                                         ●
                           80                         ●                                                             ●●                                                                                             ●
                                                                                                        ●          ●●●●●                                                            ●                                                  ●●                  ●
                                                                                                                    ●●                                                                                                                  ●                  ●                                         ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●                    ●    ●             ●                                         ●
                                             ●                                                                       ●                                                                                             ●                   ●                   ●                            ●
                                                      ●     ●          ●                                                                                                                                           ●                                                                                 ●
                                                                                          ●                                                                                         ●                                                  ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ●●                   ●
                           60                      ●                                                                                                                                ●                                                  ●●
                                                                                                        ●                              ●                                                         ●                 ●   ●                                   ●                  ●         ●                   ●
                                                   ●                   ● ●                                                         ●                   ●         ●                                                                                      ●  ●
                                                   ●    ●                ●●                                                                                      ●                   ●                                                 ● ●   ●● ●  ●      ●●      ●             ●●●     ●  ●●  ●     ●  ●
                                              ●    ●●●●      ●            ●                                        ●                                                                ●●                                                            ●     ●                 ● ● ●        ●                ●   ●●
                                              ●  ● ● ●● ●●  ●●     ●●    ●●   ●          ● ●         ●●   ●    ●   ●   ● ● ●        ●                   ●       ●●●●●●                               ●●  ●     ●   ●●     ●   ● ●    ● ● ● ● ●   ●     ●  ●●●  ●● ● ●●●●●● ●●● ● ●●● ●●● ●●●●  ●●●● ●●● ●  ●
                                             ●● ●● ●●●●   ●●●●  ● ●●●● ●  ●●●   ●● ●   ●      ●●  ●●●   ●  ●●●●         ●              ●         ●              ●●         ●●  ●     ●   ●           ●       ●    ●  ●          ●  ●   ●●●●●   ● ● ●●● ● ●●●●● ● ●●●●●●●●●  ●●●●● ● ● ●●●●● ● ●●●● ●●●●● ●●●●●
                                            ●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●● ● ●●   ●  ●● ●●●   ●●  ●●    ●●●●●●●  ● ●●    ● ● ●   ●●● ●● ●       ●●●●●●      ●    ● ●●● ●  ●●  ●    ●   ●●●●● ●   ● ●●●● ●●●● ●   ●●●●●  ●●●● ●●●●●●● ● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●
                           40                ●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●● ●●● ●●●●●●● ● ●● ●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ● ● ● ●●  ● ●    ●● ●● ● ●● ●●●  ●●●●●●  ●  ●●●●● ●●● ●●●●●● ● ●●   ●● ●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●● ●●● ● ●●●●●●●●● ●●●●● ●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●● ●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●
                                            ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●
                                            ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●● ●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●● ● ● ●●●●●● ●●●●●●● ●● ●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●
                                            ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●
                                            ●●●●●●● ●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●● ●●● ●●●●● ●●●●● ●●●●●●●● ●● ●●●●● ●●●●●●●● ●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●
                                            ● ●●●●● ●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●● ●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●● ●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●● ● ●●● ● ●●●●●●●●●●● ●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●
                                             ● ●●●● ●●● ●●●●●● ● ● ●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●● ● ●● ● ●●●● ●●●●●● ●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●● ● ●● ● ●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●● ● ●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●
                                                     ● ●  ●●● ●  ●●   ●● ●  ● ●●     ●● ●●●●●● ●●●  ● ●●●●●●● ●●      ●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ● ● ●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●  ●●●  ●●●●● ●  ●  ●   ●●  ●●●    ●      ●   ●  ●    ●  ● ●    ●             ●            ●
                           20                ●        ●            ●  ●        ●        ● ●●   ●●                          ●●●    ● ●●●●●      ●    ●●   ●  ●● ●      ●● ●●      ● ●● ●            ●      ●●  ●             ●  ●       ●●●      ●                 ●             ●●                   ●      ●
                                                                                          ●●           ●                              ●●●       ●●                       ●      ●   ●                     ●                                                 ●                                    ●
                                                      ●     ●         ●                   ●                                        ●  ●●       ● ●                       ●●                            ●                ●       ●         ●                                     ●                  ●
                                                     ●                                    ●                                                     ●●                         ●                     ●                                                                                      ●        ● ●
                                                                                                         ●              ●              ●                          ●                 ●                              ●   ●              ● ●          ●                        ●   ●       ●●       ●   ●
                                                                                                                                                                 ●●                                                     ●              ●●                                   ●                        ●
                                                   ●●●      ●●        ●●●●●●●●●                 ●       ●●●    ●●●                                               ●●●                ●                ●●●           ●●   ●● ●           ●     ●●    ●       ●                     ●●     ●   ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●
                                                            ●                                                                                                                                                      ●
                   MiSeq (strain 280)        ●         ●                  ●               ●                                                                                                                                                       ●                                           ●
                                                   ●  ●         ●                                                                  ●                                                                                                                       ●                     ●
                                            ●●            ●                                                         ●                                                                                              ● ●                                     ●          ●       ●    ●●           ●
                                             ●              ●●                    ●                                 ●                                                                                               ●                   ●                ●          ●             ● ●          ●
                                             ●●   ●●●●●  ●●  ●   ●    ●    ●   ●          ●         ●         ●  ●                                                                                ●  ●   ●  ●●     ● ●          ● ●   ●      ●● ● ●   ●      ●●● ●   ●●●●● ●  ● ●      ●●●●     ●● ●   ●●   ●
                                              ●     ●    ●●● ●  ●        ● ●              ●  ●       ●   ●   ●    ● ●         ●                                ●  ●    ●                   ●●              ●                 ●  ●●     ● ● ●  ●●     ●   ●●●   ●● ● ●● ● ● ●●●●    ●● ●● ● ●  ● ●●●    ● ● ●●
                                            ● ●● ●●● ●●●●●●● ●●● ●● ●●       ●     ●●●● ●●   ●   ●     ● ●      ● ●●●● ●● ●  ●            ●  ●                ●   ●●       ● ●          ●             ●●●       ●   ●●   ●● ●   ● ●     ●●●   ●●● ●● ●●● ●● ● ●●●● ●● ● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●● ●●●● ●   ● ●●● ●●
                                              ●●●●●●● ●● ●   ● ●●● ●●●● ● ●   ●●● ●●●●●● ●●  ● ● ●● ●    ●  ●● ●  ●●●●●●●● ●●   ●●  ●        ●       ●           ●       ●        ●●●●   ●● ●●     ●●   ●    ● ● ●  ●● ●●●●  ●●● ● ●●● ●●●●●● ●●●●● ●●● ●● ●●●● ●●●● ●●●●●●●● ●●●● ●●●●● ●●●● ● ●●●● ●●●●●●●● ●●●
                           80               ●●● ●● ●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●● ● ●● ●●●● ●●●●●● ●● ●●●●●●●●● ●●● ● ●●●●●●●   ●●●●●●●●● ●● ●● ●● ●●●     ● ●●● ●  ● ●●  ●●● ●  ●●  ●● ●● ●  ●  ● ●●  ●● ●●   ● ●●●● ●●● ● ●●● ● ●● ●●●●●●●●●● ●●●● ●●●●●● ● ●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●
                                            ●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●● ●●●●●●●● ● ●●●● ●● ●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●● ●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●● ●● ●  ●●● ●●● ●●● ●●   ●● ●● ● ● ●●● ●●●●●●●   ●●●●●● ● ●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●● ●●●● ●● ●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●● ● ●● ● ●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●
                                            ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●● ● ●●●● ●● ●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●● ●●●●●● ●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●● ●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●
                                            ●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●● ●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ● ●●●●●● ●● ●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●
                                            ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●
                                            ●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●● ●●●●●●●●● ● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●● ●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●● ● ●●●● ● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●
                                            ● ● ●●●●●● ●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●● ●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ● ●● ●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●● ●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●● ●●●●●●●● ● ●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●● ●●● ●●●●●●● ● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●● ●●●● ● ●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●● ●●
                                            ●● ●● ●●● ●● ●●●●●● ●●● ●●●●● ● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●● ● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●● ●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●● ●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●● ● ● ● ● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●● ● ●●
                           60               ●● ● ●  ●   ● ●●●●●●●●● ●● ●●● ●●●●●●●●●● ● ●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ● ●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ● ●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●● ●●● ● ● ●●●●●●●● ●●●●● ●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●● ●●● ●●●●●● ●●●● ●●●● ●●● ●● ●●●●  ●●●●●●●  ● ●●● ●● ●●  ●●● ●●● ●
                                              ●●●●● ●  ●   ●●   ●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ● ●●●● ●●● ● ●●●●● ●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●● ●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●● ●●● ●●●●● ●●●● ●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●● ●●●●● ●●●●  ● ● ●  ●●●  ●●●● ●●●   ●      ● ●● ●●●   ●       ●  ●    ●    ●   ●● ●     ●●●
                                               ●●   ●● ●    ●●● ●●  ●   ●●● ●  ●●● ●● ●●●●●●●●●●  ●●●●●●●● ●●● ●●● ● ●●● ●●●●● ●● ●●● ●●●●●●●● ●●●● ●●●●● ●● ●●● ●● ●● ●●●●●● ●●●● ●●●●●●● ●   ●● ●● ●●  ●● ●●  ● ●   ● ●●● ●●     ● ● ●   ● ● ●●●●  ● ● ●  ●   ●  ●●       ●  ● ●● ●   ● ●    ●         ●●
                                             ●   ●     ● ●   ●   ●    ● ●●     ●●   ●   ●● ●●   ● ●  ●●  ●      ●     ●     ●   ●     ●   ●●  ●    ●●    ● ●●● ● ● ●● ●● ●  ●●●● ●●●●●● ●        ●●●  ●  ●  ●●●  ●    ● ●● ●  ●         ● ●●●               ●            ●  ●   ●●      ●           ●●    ●
                                                      ●●       ●●   ●   ●●        ●             ●    ● ● ●    ●●           ●   ●       ●●      ●●           ●●  ●●    ●   ●    ●●●●●● ●●●●●●      ●      ●  ●●  ●          ● ●  ●      ●  ●●       ●            ●               ●● ●               ●      ●
                                                             ●              ● ●        ●●  ●  ●       ●        ●                         ●●     ●                ●        ●    ● ●● ●             ●                        ●           ●   ●                        ●            ●●              ●  ●●    ●
                                                      ●●            ●   ●●  ●  ●     ●   ●●     ●    ●●                      ●                                 ●         ●●●    ●●● ●●                      ●   ●                                                               ●●●●●   ●        ● ●     ●
                                             ●                      ●                    ●      ●                                      ●●       ●      ●                         ●●                        ●                                               ●      ●●        ●   ●
                           40                         ●                  ●             ● ●                                             ●●      ● ●                       ●●     ●●                                 ●                                        ●               ●   ●●          ●      ●      ● ●
                                                                                       ●               ●                               ●                           ●            ●   ●                                                  ●          ●               ●             ●●               ●        ● ●
                                                                                       ●  ●     ●      ●                              ●                           ●      ●●                                                                                                     ●                         ●●
                                                                       ●                  ●     ●                                               ●●                       ●                                                            ● ●                                        ●●              ●   ●
                                                     ●                   ●                      ●                                      ●                                                                                                                  ●                      ●
                                                            ●                                                                         ●         ●                          ●                                                              ●                                     ●                         ●●
                                                            ●                                                                                   ●                         ●                                        ●    ●  ●           ●     ●    ●                             ●●
                                                   ● ● ●              ●                   ●                                ●                                               ●        ●            ●     ●           ●       ●              ●                ●                     ●                   ●
                           20                                                                                           ●                                                                                                              ●          ●●                             ●●     ●
                   Ion Torrent 1             ●                                                          ●                                                                                                                              ●●          ●
                                                   ●  ●                                                                                                                                          ●                         ●●                                               ●                    ●
                                                                       ●                                 ●                                                                                                              ●              ●●          ●       ●                            ●          ● ●●
                                                            ●                                                                                                    ●                                                         ●           ●                   ●                    ●       ●        ●
                                                                                                                                       ●                                                                                               ●●    ●                              ●                    ●
                                                   ●●       ●         ●●●●●●●●●●                ●●      ●●●    ●●●●                                              ●●●●               ●                ●●●●          ●●   ●● ●           ●     ●●    ●                             ●●     ●   ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●
                                                                                                                                                                  ●                                                ●                   ●
                       100     0             ●                                                                                         ●                                                                                                                                    ●
                                             ●                                            ●                                                                                                                                           ● ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ●                                               ●
                                                                                          ●                                                                                                                                            ●                                                             ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●                                                                         ●
                                                      ●     ●                                           ●                          ●                                                                                                         ●                                   ●    ●
                                            ●●                                                       ●                                                                                                                                                                         ●    ●
                                               ●   ●   ●●                                                                                                                                            ●                                            ●                ●                 ●●●  ●                ●
                           80                           ●                                                ●                                                                          ●      ●           ●          ●● ●              ●                 ●             ● ●●  ●    ●     ●  ●●      ●   ●      ●
                                            ●● ●●           ●●● ●●●       ●      ●●      ●● ●● ●        ●           ●      ● ●●               ●                   ●        ●          ●      ●     ●    ● ●    ●●    ●●●     ●●●    ●       ●     ● ●●   ●●● ● ●● ●●● ●●●● ●     ● ●●●●● ●  ●●●● ● ●●  ●  ● ●
                                             ●● ●● ●   ●● ●●●● ●●●●      ●●   ● ● ●●●● ●  ●    ●  ●●                ●●   ●   ●     ●● ●●  ●             ●                ●● ●●  ●  ● ● ●    ●  ●● ●   ●  ●         ●● ● ●●  ●●   ●● ●   ●  ●●●●● ●●● ●●●●     ●●●●● ● ●●●●●  ●●●    ● ●  ●●●●● ● ●●●●●●   ● ●
                                            ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●● ●●●●●●●● ●● ●●●● ●●     ● ●● ●●● ●  ● ● ●●  ● ● ●●●●●●●●●● ●●   ● ●● ● ●  ● ●  ●●●  ● ●●●             ●●●    ●  ●● ● ● ● ●  ●●● ● ● ●●●●●  ●   ●●   ●● ●● ●  ●●●  ●●●●● ●●●  ●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●● ●●●●● ● ●● ● ●●●●●●●
                                                ●● ●●●●●●● ● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●  ●●●●●● ●●●● ● ● ● ● ●● ●●●  ●●● ● ●●●●● ● ● ●  ●   ● ● ●●●  ●●●       ●● ●●● ●   ●●  ●     ●●    ●●  ●●●●  ●●● ●●●●●● ●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●● ●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●● ●●●●● ●●● ● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ● ● ●●●●●●●●●●
                                            ●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●● ●●●●●●●●● ●●● ●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ● ● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●● ●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●● ●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●
                                            ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●● ●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●
                                            ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●
                           60               ●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●● ●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ● ●● ●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●
                                            ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●● ●●● ●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●● ●●●●●
                                            ●●●●●● ●●● ● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●● ●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●● ●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●● ● ●●● ●●●●●● ●●●● ●●● ● ●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●
                                            ●●● ●●● ●● ● ●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●● ●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●● ● ● ●●● ●●●●●●●●● ● ●●●●●●● ●●● ●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●● ●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●● ●● ● ● ●● ●●●●●●● ●● ●
                                             ●●  ●●● ●●●●  ● ●●●● ●●●● ●●●●●●● ●●●●●●  ●●●●●●● ● ● ●●●● ● ● ●●●●●● ●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●● ● ●●●●●●●●●● ●● ● ●●●●● ●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●  ●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●● ● ● ●●●●● ● ●●● ●● ● ●         ●●● ●●●   ●●  ●●●● ●       ●●●●●● ●   ●●  ●
                                                  ●●●  ● ● ●    ● ● ●●  ●  ●●●●● ●● ●●●●●●●●●   ●●  ●●● ●●●●●●●●● ● ● ●●●●●●●● ●●● ●●●●●● ●●●●●● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ●●●●●● ●●●●●●● ●●●●●● ●● ●●  ● ●   ●●●●●● ●●●●●   ● ●●● ● ●     ●  ●    ●●  ●      ●    ●     ● ●        ●● ●   ●●●     ●● ●● ●●     ●    ●●●
                                                 ●           ● ●       ● ●●    ●         ●●     ●   ●●● ●             ●●●●●  ●     ●  ●   ●● ●  ●● ●    ●   ● ● ●● ● ●●●● ● ● ●●●●   ●● ●●  ●  ●  ●      ●● ●    ●    ●●               ●● ●   ●                   ●      ●  ●   ●●●●●              ● ●    ●
                                                     ●●           ●   ●  ●             ● ●      ●    ●●●   ●             ●      ●  ●   ●                 ● ●       ● ● ●● ●● ● ● ●●  ● ●          ●                         ●●  ●       ● ●                 ●               ●   ●●●●    ●        ●       ●●
                           40                ●        ●●                       ●       ● ● ●    ●    ●●                                ●        ●●     ●●                ●●     ●●●                                      ●                                        ●         ●   ●●                        ●
                                                      ●                                       ● ●     ●                                         ●                               ●●●                        ●          ●                ●                                        ●●●●●
                                                                         ●             ● ●      ●                                     ●●       ●●                        ●                                                 ●    ●                                           ●    ●      ●          ● ●    ● ●●
                                                       ●               ●                  ●     ●                                     ●●                                            ●                                                     ●                                      ●               ●        ●
                                                                         ●           ● ●  ●            ●                              ●●       ●●●                       ●●      ●                                                                                ●             ●                         ●
                                                     ●                                    ●                                            ●        ●●●                                                                                                                             ●
                                                     ●                                    ●                                           ●                           ●       ●                                                               ●                                     ●●●
                                                                                                                           ●                                                                                            ●                          ●                                                 ●
                           20                                         ●                   ●                                                                                ●●                                                                                                                    ●
                   Ion Torrent 2                                                                                                                                                                                           ●              ●                                 ●
                                                   ●  ●                                                  ●                                                                                                                 ●           ●                                        ●●●     ●            ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ●                ●  ●                 ●     ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●                                    ●          ●
                                                                                                                                                                 ●                                                                                                                               ●●
                                                   ●●                 ●●●●●●●●●●                ●●      ●●●    ●●●●                                              ●●●                ●                ●●●           ●●   ●● ●           ●     ●●    ●       ●                     ●●     ●   ●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●

                               0

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●

                           80


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●

                           60                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ●


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ●                          ●
                                                                            ●                        ●●        ●                                                                                                                                                                   ●
                           40                             ● ●●        ●     ●                         ●        ●                                               ●                     ●                                                                     ●                        ●                ●
                                                                      ●                               ●  ●                                                       ●                              ●           ●      ●●       ●●                                 ●              ●    ●
                                                      ●        ●     ●●  ●                                                  ●           ●   ●         ●●         ●                                                        ●            ●     ●    ●            ●   ●    ●● ●  ●●    ●                      ●
                                             ●●●●    ●  ●●  ●       ●         ●         ● ●          ●      ●     ●●        ●                ●                 ●         ●                     ●●                            ●        ●●●●●●               ●   ●●●●      ●         ●●    ●     ● ●     ●● ●
                                              ●●●●●   ●● ●●●●●●●●●● ● ●●●●●   ●  ●●● ●●●  ●       ● ●   ●  ●● ●  ●●●●   ●●        ●      ●●●●●    ●●●●●●   ●    ● ●        ●   ●● ●  ●  ● ●● ●      ●       ●●  ●    ●  ● ●● ●●● ●   ● ●●  ●● ●   ●● ●●●   ● ●●●●●●●● ●● ●●●   ●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●● ●●    ● ●● ●●
                                            ●●● ●●●●  ●●●●●●●●●●  ●● ●●  ●● ●●  ●● ● ● ●● ● ●●●●●●● ●●●● ●● ●●● ● ●●●●●● ● ●     ●●●●●● ●●●●● ●●●● ●    ●  ●● ●● ●●●●●● ●●●●● ●●●   ●  ●● ●● ●●● ●●   ●●  ●● ●●●●   ●●  ●●●● ●●●●●●●●● ●● ●● ●●●●●● ●●● ●●● ●● ●●●●● ●● ●●●●●●●●●● ● ●●●●●● ●●●●● ● ●●●●●●●● ●●●
                                            ●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●● ● ● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ● ●●●●● ●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●● ●● ● ●●●● ●●●●●● ●●● ●  ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●● ●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●
                                            ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●● ●●●●●●● ●●●●● ●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●
                                            ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●
                           20               ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●
                   454 Junior 1             ●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●
                                            ●●● ●● ●● ●●●●●●●● ●● ●●●● ●● ●●●● ●●●●●●● ●● ●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●● ●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●● ●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●● ●●●●●● ●●●●●●● ●●●● ●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●● ●●● ●●●●●●●●●● ●● ●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●
                                            ●●●  ●● ●●●●● ●●●●●●● ● ●●●● ●●●●● ●  ●●●●●●  ●●●●  ●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●● ●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●● ●● ●●● ●●● ●● ●● ●●● ●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●● ● ●●●●●● ● ●●●●● ●●●● ●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ● ●●●●●    ●  ● ●● ●● ● ● ●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●● ● ●●●● ●●●●● ● ●●●●●●
                                             ●●    ● ● ●● ●           ●●●●  ●  ● ●      ● ●         ●●●● ●●           ●●●●● ●●●●     ●●       ●●●● ● ●  ● ●●     ●●●● ●  ●●●●●●● ●●● ●●●             ●●●●●●      ●●●●●●●● ●●●●  ●● ●   ●●●●●   ● ●●    ● ●●     ●● ● ● ●●●    ●● ●●●    ●●  ●    ● ● ●
                                                            ●         ●●●                 ●       ●                      ●       ●    ●●●       ●      ●         ●       ●●  ●      ●●●●  ●           ●            ● ● ●●● ●●   ●●     ●●● ●●●     ●●                 ●  ●       ●●     ●    ●●  ●   ●●     ●
                                             ●     ●        ●                             ●●    ●●    ●                                                                              ●                                     ●           ●                   ●                     ●          ●    ●   ●
                                                   ●                   ●●●●●●●                  ●       ●●●    ●●●●                             ●                ●●●●                                ●●●           ●●                  ●     ●●                                  ●●●    ●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●
                       100     0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●                                         ●


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●



                           80


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ●
                           60



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ●

                                                                      ●                                                                                                                                                                 ●
                                                             ●                                                                                                                                                                          ●
                           40                                                                                                                                                                                                          ●                   ●
                                                             ●        ●                                                                                                                                                                ●●        ●         ●
                                                                                                                                                                                                    ●           ●                                         ●
                                                ●●● ●     ● ●●  ●                                            ●                         ●                                                                                 ●          ●● ●         ● ● ●● ●  ●●●         ●●    ●     ●     ●          ●●●
                                            ●●● ●●  ●  ●    ●● ●●●            ●●● ●          ●    ●      ● ●  ●    ●●       ●                  ●                            ●●      ● ●●    ●●         ●        ●●● ●    ● ● ●●● ●●●● ●●     ● ●    ● ●●     ● ● ●●     ● ●     ●● ●    ●●    ●●    ●
                                            ●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●● ●● ●●●●● ●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●● ●●● ●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●     ●●●●●● ●● ●●●●●●● ●  ●●●●     ● ●●   ●●●●● ●●●● ● ●●● ● ●●●● ●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●● ●● ● ●●● ●● ●  ●●●●●● ● ●●●●●●● ●● ●●●●●●● ●●●● ●●●● ●● ●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●● ●●●●● ● ●●●
                                            ●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●● ●●● ●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●● ●●●●●
                                            ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●
                           20               ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●
                   454 Junior 2             ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●
                                            ●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●● ●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●● ●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●
                                            ●● ●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●● ●●●●●●●● ● ●●● ●●●●●●● ●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●● ●● ●●●●●●● ●●●● ●● ●●●●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●●● ●●●●●●●●●●●●● ● ●●●●●●●●●● ●● ●●●●●●●●●● ●● ● ●●●●●●●●●●● ●●●● ●
                                              ●    ●    ●   ●●●    ●  ●● ●  ●          ●●● ●●●  ●     ●● ●  ●  ●●       ●●●●    ●  ● ●●●●●     ●●● ●●● ● ●●●●●●  ●● ●    ●●●● ●●●●● ●●●●    ●  ●  ●                   ●● ● ●●   ●●●●●  ●●●●●●   ●  ●●      ●      ●● ●●●      ● ●●●   ● ●● ●● ●  ●● ●●●● ●● ●
                                             ●     ● ●●●     ●             ●              ●           ●  ●   ●          ●       ●●    ●●        ●●   ●  ●●       ●        ●●●       ●●●●             ● ●     ●       ● ●● ●●    ●●●●●   ●●● ●●                  ● ●  ●●  ●    ● ●●●     ●  ●     ● ● ●      ●
                                                            ●                             ●     ●              ●                                                 ●●      ●           ●●●                                   ●    ●      ●           ●       ●             ●       ●●     ●●  ●      ● ●
                                                   ●●                  ●●●●●●●                  ●●      ●●●    ●●●                                               ●●●                                 ●●●           ●●                  ●     ●●                                  ●●     ●●  ●●●●●●●●●●●●●● ●
                               0

                                          0'                                                                                  2000000                                                                                         4000000                                                                      3'



                                                                              1000000                                                                                         3000000                                                                                         5000000






















Figure 3: Depth of coverage plot for reads from each benchtop instrument against the E. coli









strain 280 reference chromosome. In the MiSeq plot the large peak at 1.5 megabases corresponds








to the Shiga-toxin producing phage, indicating the phage was likely undergoing lysis when DNA









was being prepared. A smaller peak can be seen at the same position in the Ion Torrent PGM








data.)









































                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       27
        2 9 5 6 0 2 3 1 81 8 1 1 7 4     3 2 4 3 3
   m    7 2 2 1 6 4      1 1 1 1 2 1
   o                                                   l l clc l clclc l clc l l clc l cl l  l  l  l
   o                                                   c c c c c c c c c c c c c c c c c
   o g                                                 o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
   H r                                                 n n n n n n n n n n n n n n n n n
        2 3 7 7 0 2 2 4 9 0 5 7 9 7 6 3 6
     g  9 5 3 2 6 6 7 7 5 7 7 7 4 3 6 4 7
     l                                                 l l clc l clclc l clc l l clc l cl l  l  l  l
     m                                                 c c c c c c c c c c c c c c c c c
     s                                                 o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
     A                                                 n n n n n n n n n n n n n n n n n
        7 9 2   7  8 5   1 5 2   6  7 7 0 4   5 3 7 7 9 7 5 1 7 8 1 4 6 6 2             5 7 2 2 6
m    d  5 8 7   .  2 4   . 8 5   .  7 . 1.9 . 9 7 0 7 5 5 1 1 5 2 9 2 8 3 8             . 0 5 2 6
e    e  7 5 3 . 4  7 5.  4 5 4.  5  4 5 5 3   4 4 5 8 7 6 7 8 7 7 7 7 7 7 7  . .  .  .  7 7 7 7 7  .
g  o o
% n c
        5  4 3 4   1 5 4 2 1 1 3 2       3 0 1 8 0     8 5 8 7    1 9 7 4 2 6 3 9       9 5 5 4 9
     a  1  8 6 4   1 1 2 2 1 2 2 2       5 4 7 4 8     1 9 7 6    1 1 2 2 1 1 2 2       6 6 7 7 7
     l
     o
     T
        8 7 9 7 0 9      8 1 7 6 0 2     5 0 5 1 9 8 2 6 8 2 1         6 5 3 8 6 9      4 3 7 4 9
   p l  4 4 2 2 4 5      1 1 1 1 2 1     2 2 3 2 3 5 5 3 3 5 6         1 1 1 1 2 1      3 3 3 3 3
   g b
   t s
   T a
        7  4 5 0 1 7 9 1 5 1 6 8 2 3 8 7 1             8 5 0 6 5 4 1 9 0 4 1 9 6 4 2 6 8
   s    1  3 3 1 8 4 4 5 3 4 4 4 2 2 3 2 4             2 4 4 2 8 4 5 4 3 4 4 4 3 3 3 3 3
   a c  1                                              1
   a r
   o e
   T r
        3  8  3 3  2  8  9 1 6 1 7 1 1 5 1 1 2 6 3 4 3 5 3 5 3 5 3 4 3 4 5 4 4 5
l  a s
c li c
L c bl
        7 3   1 0  6 3 8 2 3 1 1 1 4 0 9         3 8   7 3  1 0   6 3 8 2 3 1 1 1 4 0 9         3 8
        2 6   4 0  0 8 1 7 0 4 8 2 5 7 1         7 6   2 6  4 0   0 8 1 7 0 4 8 2 5 7 1         7 6
   b    4 5   2 1  5 3 4 5 6 5 4 5 8 8 4         0 1   4 5  2 1   5 3 4 5 6 5 4 5 8 8 4         0 1
   e          1 1                                1 1        1 1                                 1 1
   s 5
   A N
        6 3 1 1 3 8 9 5 6 8 1 9 2 7 2 3 2 6 3 1 1 3 8 9 5 6 8 1 9 2 7 2 3 2
   s g  5 4 0 5 3 0 4 4 5 5 6 4 7 1 0 8 9 5 4 0 5 3 0 4 4 5 5 6 4 7 1 0 8 9
   r n  1 2 3 3 1 2 1 2 2 1 1 2 2 3 1 2 2 1 2 3 3 1 2 1 2 2 1 1 2 2 3 1 2 2
   L c

   y    7 0 5 4 0 1 7 8 3 5 8 5 3 5 8 6 0 7 0 5 4 0 1 7 8 3 5 8 5 3 5 8 6 0
   b    2 7 6 2 2 7 5 5 7 5 4 5 9 5 3 9 3 2 7 6 2 2 7 5 5 7 5 4 5 9 5 3 9 3
   s e  5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5
   A s
        8 2   8 6 0 5 6 3 5 7 6 9 1 4 2 0 5 8 2             8  6 0 5 6 3 5 7 6 9 1 4 2 0 5
   r i  1 3   9 2 1 4 3 5 3 5 3 5 3 2 6 2 5 1 3             9  2 1 4 3 5 3 5 3 5 3 2 6 2 5
   b o
   u f
   N o

     l     e    e     e    e     e    e                  e     e    e     e    e     e
     m  A  b  A b  A  b  A b  A  b  A b     A e     e  A b  A  b  A b  A  b  A b  A  b    A  e     e
     s  I  e  I e  I  e  I e  I  e  I e  L  I e  L  e  I e  I  e  I e  I  e  I e  I  e  L I  e  L  e
     A  M N M N M N M N M N M N C M V C V M N M N M N M N M N M N C M V C V
     e  8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8              9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9
     e  2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2              5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5
     f                                                 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5
     R

                              2 2
              ) )        1 1 1 1 2 2
        ) ) + + ) )      ( ( ( ( ( (             s s        ) )              2 2                s s
        r r r r r r      G G G G G G     g g g   l dl  ) ) + + ) )     1 1 1 1 2 2      g g g   l dl
        i oio i i oi  i  t t t t t t     n n ni  f f   ( ( ( ( ( (     t t t t t t      n n ni  f f
        J J J J J J      r r r r r r     c c c s s c   i i oio i oi i  r r r r r r      c c c s s c
     r  S S S S S S      o o o o o o     q q q q q     u u u u u u     o o o o o o      q q q q q
     t  4 4 4 4 4 4      n n n n n n     i SiSiS i  i  4 4 4 4 4 4     n n n n n n      i i SiS i  i
     P  4 4 4 4 4 4 I    o I oIo I oI I  M M M M M 4 4 4 4 4 4 I 5     o oIo I I oI  I  M M M M M
a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a  l  l l  l
t t t t t t t t t t t t t t t t t
n n n n n n n n n n n n n n n n n


c c c c c c c c c c c c c c c c c
c c c c c c c c c c c c c c c c c  l  l l  l
o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o
n n n n n n n n n n n n n n n n n
3 2 4   9  7 8  3 7   5 4  6  1 9 1 8 3 7
5 9 2   .  6 .  3 3   . 5  .  2 4 4 7 1 9
6 4 2.  2  7 4  4 4.  3 5  3  4 3 3 3 3 3  .


3  8 3 5   8 1 6 6 4 7 3 9      7 9 3 4 4
1  8 7 5   1 1 2 2 1 1 2 2      5 4 6 5 7



5 1 8 6 6 5     7 5 0 0 1 6     0 8 3 6 9
5 5 3 3 4 6     1 1 1 1 2 1     3 2 3 2 3



7  7 4 9 2 6 9 1 3 6 1 2 7 0 0 7 5
1  3 3 1 8 4 3 4 3 3 4 4 2 2 3 2 3



6  4 2  1  6 5  4  3  7 1  9  1 9  2  7 9  5
4    2     2    5     5    6       3       1



8 0  8 8   8 2 8 8 7 3 3 1 6 3 1        6 3
2 0  3 9   1 9 8 8 0 5 1 1 2 1 6        0 1
4 5  1 1   5 3 4 5 6 5 4 5 8 8 4        1 1


6 7 8 5 9 3 8 0 5 6 7 7 9 4 5 4 6
5 4 0 5 3 0 4 4 5 5 6 4 7 1 0 8 9
1 2 3 3 1 2 1 2 2 1 1 2 2 3 1 2 2


7 0 5 4 0 1 7 8 3 5 8 5 3 5 8 6 0
2 4 4 6 4 6 2 6 9 4 2 4 2 3 3 8 9
5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5

8 2  8  6 0 5 6 3 5 7 6 9 1 4 2 0 5
1 3  9  2 1 4 3 5 3 5 3 5 3 2 6 2 5




   l    l    l     l    l     l
A  b A  b  A b  A  b  A b  A  b    A  v    v
I  e I  e  I e  I  e  I e  I  e L  I le L  e
M N M N M N M N M N M N C M V C V
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3
c c c c c c c c c c c c c c c c c



     2 2        ) ) + + ) ) s s s ) )   d d
1 1 1 1 2 2     ( ( ( ( ( (     t t t i f fl
r r r r r r     n n n n n n     o o o c c a
n n n n n n r r r r r r r r ( ( ( ( ( s s
J J J J J J     T T T T T T     e e e e e
5 5 5 5 5 5     o o o o o o     i SiS i i  i
4 4 4 4 4 4 I      I  I I  I  I M M M M M
Supplementary Table 5
                                                                           Mis-
                                                                           match                   agree with

Category      Platform           Reference    Gene                Length   es     Indels identity  280?
st678.fa      280 Reference      Reference    ADK6                     536      0      0   100.00% agreement

st678.fa      454 Junior (1)     Newbler      ADK6                     536      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      454 Junior (1)     MIRA         ADK6                     376      0      0    70.15% disagreement
st678.fa      454 Junior (1+2)   Newbler      ADK6                     536      0      0   100.00% agreement

st678.fa      454 Junior (1+2)   MIRA         ADK6                     536      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      454 Junior (2)     Newbler      ADK6                     377      0      0    70.34% disagreement

st678.fa      454 Junior (2)     MIRA         ADK6                     536      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      C236-11            Reference    ADK6                     536      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      Ion Torrent (1)    Newbler      ADK6                     536      0      0   100.00% agreement

st678.fa      Ion Torrent (1)    MIRA         ADK6                     536      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      Ion Torrent (1+2)  Newbler      ADK6                     536      0      0   100.00% agreement

st678.fa      Ion Torrent (1+2)  MIRA         ADK6                     536      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      Ion Torrent (2)    Newbler      ADK6                     536      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      Ion Torrent (2)    MIRA         ADK6                     536      0      0   100.00% agreement

st678.fa      MiSeq (contigs)    MIRA         ADK6                     536      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      MiSeq (contigs)    Velvet       ADK6                     536      0      0   100.00% agreement

st678.fa      MiSeq (contigs)    CLC          ADK6                     536      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      MiSeq (scaffolds)  Velvet       ADK6                     536      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      MiSeq (scaffolds)  CLC          ADK6                     536      0      0   100.00% agreement

st678.fa      280 Reference      Reference    FUMC6                    469      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      454 Junior (1)     Newbler      FUMC6                    469      0      0   100.00% agreement

st678.fa      454 Junior (1)     MIRA         FUMC6                    469      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      454 Junior (1+2)   Newbler      FUMC6                    469      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      454 Junior (1+2)   MIRA         FUMC6                    469      0      0   100.00% agreement

st678.fa      454 Junior (2)     Newbler      FUMC6                    469      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      454 Junior (2)     MIRA         FUMC6                    469      0      0   100.00% agreement

st678.fa      C236-11            Reference    FUMC6                    469      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      Ion Torrent (1)    Newbler      FUMC6                    469      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      Ion Torrent (1)    MIRA         FUMC6                    469      0      0   100.00% agreement

st678.fa      Ion Torrent (1+2)  Newbler      FUMC6                    469      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      Ion Torrent (1+2)  MIRA         FUMC6                    469      0      0   100.00% agreement

st678.fa      Ion Torrent (2)    Newbler      FUMC6                    469      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      Ion Torrent (2)    MIRA         FUMC6                    469      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      MiSeq (contigs)    MIRA         FUMC6                    469      0      0   100.00% agreement

st678.fa      MiSeq (contigs)    Velvet       FUMC6                    469      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      MiSeq (contigs)    CLC          FUMC6                    469      0      0   100.00% agreement

st678.fa      MiSeq (scaffolds)  Velvet       FUMC6                    469      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      MiSeq (scaffolds)  CLC          FUMC6                    469      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      280 Reference      Reference    GYRB5                    460      0      0   100.00% agreement

st678.fa      454 Junior (1)     Newbler      GYRB5                    460      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      454 Junior (1)     MIRA         GYRB5                    460      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      454 Junior (1+2)   Newbler      GYRB5                    460      0      0   100.00% agreement

st678.fa      454 Junior (1+2)   MIRA         GYRB5                    461      1      1   100.00% disagreement
st678.fa      454 Junior (2)     Newbler      GYRB5                    460      0      0   100.00% agreement

st678.fa      454 Junior (2)     MIRA         GYRB5                    460      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      C236-11            Reference    GYRB5                    460      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      Ion Torrent (1)    Newbler      GYRB5                    460      0      0   100.00% agreement

st678.fa      Ion Torrent (1)    MIRA         GYRB5                    460      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      Ion Torrent (1+2)  Newbler      GYRB5                    460      0      0   100.00% agreement

st678.fa      Ion Torrent (1+2)  MIRA         GYRB5                    460      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      Ion Torrent (2)    Newbler      GYRB5                    460      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      Ion Torrent (2)    MIRA         GYRB5                    460      0      0   100.00% agreement

st678.fa      MiSeq (contigs)    MIRA         GYRB5                    460      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      MiSeq (contigs)    Velvet       GYRB5                    460      0      0   100.00% agreement

st678.fa      MiSeq (contigs)    CLC          GYRB5                    460      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      MiSeq (scaffolds)  Velvet       GYRB5                    460      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      MiSeq (scaffolds)  CLC          GYRB5                    460      0      0   100.00% agreement

st678.fa      280 Reference      Reference    ICD136                   518      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      454 Junior (1)     Newbler      ICD136                   518      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      454 Junior (1)     MIRA         ICD136                   518      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      454 Junior (1+2)   Newbler      ICD136                   518      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      454 Junior (1+2)   MIRA         ICD136                   518      0      0   100.00% agreement

st678.fa      454 Junior (2)     Newbler      ICD136                   518      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      454 Junior (2)     MIRA         ICD136                    31      3      0     5.41% disagreement

st678.fa      C236-11            Reference    ICD136                   518      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      Ion Torrent (1)    Newbler      ICD136                   518      1      1    99.81% disagreement
st678.fa      Ion Torrent (1)    MIRA         ICD136                   518      0      0   100.00% agreement

st678.fa      Ion Torrent (1+2)  Newbler      ICD136                   518      1      1    99.81% disagreement
st678.fa      Ion Torrent (1+2)  MIRA         ICD136                   518      0      0   100.00% agreement

st678.fa      Ion Torrent (2)    Newbler      ICD136                   518      1      1    99.81% disagreement
st678.fa      Ion Torrent (2)    MIRA         ICD136                   518      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      MiSeq (contigs)    MIRA         ICD136                   518      0      0   100.00% agreement

st678.fa      MiSeq (contigs)    Velvet       ICD136                   518      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      MiSeq (contigs)    CLC          ICD136                   518      0      0   100.00% agreement

st678.fa      MiSeq (scaffolds)  Velvet       ICD136                   518      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      MiSeq (scaffolds)  CLC          ICD136                   518      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      280 Reference      Reference    MDH9                     452      0      0   100.00% agreement

st678.fa      454 Junior (1)     Newbler      MDH9                     452      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      454 Junior (1)     MIRA         MDH9                     452      0      0   100.00% agreement

st678.fa      454 Junior (1+2)   Newbler      MDH9                     452      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      454 Junior (1+2)   MIRA         MDH9                     452      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      454 Junior (2)     Newbler      MDH9                     452      0      0   100.00% agreement

st678.fa      454 Junior (2)     MIRA         MDH9                     452      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      C236-11            Reference    MDH9                     452      0      0   100.00% agreement

st678.fa      Ion Torrent (1)    Newbler      MDH9                     452      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      Ion Torrent (1)    MIRA         MDH9                     452      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      Ion Torrent (1+2)  Newbler      MDH9                     452      0      0   100.00% agreement

st678.fa      Ion Torrent (1+2)  MIRA         MDH9                     452      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      Ion Torrent (2)    Newbler      MDH9                     452      0      0   100.00% agreement

st678.fa      Ion Torrent (2)    MIRA         MDH9                     452      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      MiSeq (contigs)    MIRA         MDH9                     452      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      MiSeq (contigs)    Velvet       MDH9                     452      0      0   100.00% agreement

st678.fa      MiSeq (contigs)    CLC          MDH9                     452      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      MiSeq (scaffolds)  Velvet       MDH9                     452      0      0   100.00% agreement

st678.fa      MiSeq (scaffolds)  CLC          MDH9                     452      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      280 Reference      Reference    PURA7                    478      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      454 Junior (1)     Newbler      PURA7                    478      0      0   100.00% agreement

st678.fa      454 Junior (1)     MIRA         PURA7                    478      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      454 Junior (1+2)   Newbler      PURA7                    478      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      454 Junior (1+2)   MIRA         PURA7                    478      0      0   100.00% agreement

st678.fa      454 Junior (2)     Newbler      PURA7                    478      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      454 Junior (2)     MIRA         PURA7                    478      0      0   100.00% agreement

st678.fa      C236-11            Reference    PURA7                    478      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      Ion Torrent (1)    Newbler      PURA7                    478      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      Ion Torrent (1)    MIRA         PURA7                    478      0      0   100.00% agreement

st678.fa      Ion Torrent (1+2)  Newbler      PURA7                    478      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      Ion Torrent (1+2)  MIRA         PURA7                    478      0      0   100.00% agreement

st678.fa      Ion Torrent (2)    Newbler      PURA7                    478      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      Ion Torrent (2)    MIRA         PURA7                    478      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      MiSeq (contigs)    MIRA         PURA7                    478      0      0   100.00% agreement

st678.fa      MiSeq (contigs)    Velvet       PURA7                    478      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      MiSeq (contigs)    CLC          PURA7                    478      0      0   100.00% agreement

st678.fa      MiSeq (scaffolds)  Velvet       PURA7                    478      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      MiSeq (scaffolds)  CLC          PURA7                    478      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      280 Reference      Reference    RECA7                    510      0      0   100.00% agreement

st678.fa      454 Junior (1)     Newbler      RECA7                    510      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      454 Junior (1)     MIRA         RECA7                    510      0      0   100.00% agreement

st678.fa      454 Junior (1+2)   Newbler      RECA7                    510      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      454 Junior (1+2)   MIRA         RECA7                    510      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      454 Junior (2)     Newbler      RECA7                    510      0      0   100.00% agreement

st678.fa      454 Junior (2)     MIRA         RECA7                    510      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa      C236-11            Reference    RECA7                    510      0      0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa         Ion Torrent (1)       Newbler        RECA7                        510        0        0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa         Ion Torrent (1)       MIRA           RECA7                        510        0        0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa         Ion Torrent (1+2)     Newbler        RECA7                        510        1        1    99.80% disagreement

st678.fa         Ion Torrent (1+2)     MIRA           RECA7                        510        0        0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa         Ion Torrent (2)       Newbler        RECA7                        510        0        0   100.00% agreement

st678.fa         Ion Torrent (2)       MIRA           RECA7                        510        1        1    99.80% disagreement
st678.fa         MiSeq (contigs)       MIRA           RECA7                        510        0        0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa         MiSeq (contigs)       Velvet         RECA7                        510        0        0   100.00% agreement

st678.fa         MiSeq (contigs)       CLC            RECA7                        510        0        0   100.00% agreement
st678.fa         MiSeq (scaffolds)     Velvet         RECA7                        510        0        0   100.00% agreement

st678.fa         MiSeq (scaffolds)     CLC            RECA7                        510        0        0   100.00% agreement
spates.fa        280 Reference         Reference      gi|218697865|ref|YP_0024    1375232.1| Serine pro0teasep.c5precagrrseoenMt u) [Escherichia coli 55989]
spates.fa        454 Junior (1)        Newbler        gi|218697865|ref|YP_0024    1375232.1| Serine pro0teasep.c5precagrrseoenMt u) [Escherichia coli 55989]

spates.fa        454 Junior (1)        MIRA           gi|218697865|ref|YP_0024    1375232.1| Serine pro0teasep.c5precagrrseoenMt u) [Escherichia coli 55989]
spates.fa        454 Junior (1+2)      Newbler        gi|218697865|ref|YP_0024    1375232.1| Serine pro0teasep.c5precagrrseoenMt u) [Escherichia coli 55989]

spates.fa        454 Junior (1+2)      MIRA           gi|218697865|ref|YP_00240    955332.1| Serine pro0teasep.c1precduiorreShMenut) [Escherichia coli 55989]
spates.fa        454 Junior (2)        Newbler        gi|218697865|ref|YP_0024    1375232.1| Serine pro0teasep.c5precagrrseoenMt u) [Escherichia coli 55989]
spates.fa        454 Junior (2)        MIRA           gi|218697865|ref|YP_00240    985732.1| Serine pro0teasep.c2precduiorreShMenut) [Escherichia coli 55989]

spates.fa        C236-11               Reference      gi|218697865|ref|YP_0024    1375232.1| Serine pro0teasep.c5precagrrseoenMt u) [Escherichia coli 55989]
spates.fa        Ion Torrent (1)       Newbler        gi|218697865|ref|YP_0024    1285532.1| Serine pro0teasep.c1precduiorreShMenut) [Escherichia coli 55989]

spates.fa        Ion Torrent (1)       MIRA           gi|218697865|ref|YP_0024    1365332.1| Serine pro0teasep.c8precduiorreShMenut) [Escherichia coli 55989]
spates.fa        Ion Torrent (1+2)     Newbler        gi|218697865|ref|YP_0024    1375232.1| Serine pro0teasep.c5precagrrseoenMt u) [Escherichia coli 55989]
spates.fa        Ion Torrent (1+2)     MIRA           gi|218697865|ref|YP_00240    575232.1| Serine pro0teasep.c9precduiorreShMenut) [Escherichia coli 55989]

spates.fa        Ion Torrent (2)       Newbler        gi|218697865|ref|YP_0024    1375232.1| Serine pro0teasep.c5precagrrseoenMt u) [Escherichia coli 55989]
spates.fa        Ion Torrent (2)       MIRA           gi|218697865|ref|YP_00240    825732.137Serine pr1o8teasp.c1precduiorreShMenut) [Escherichia coli 55989]

spates.fa        MiSeq (contigs)       MIRA           gi|218697865|ref|YP_0024    1385732.161Serine pr3o7teasp.c5precduiorreShMenut) [Escherichia coli 55989]
spates.fa        MiSeq (contigs)       Velvet         gi|218697865|ref|YP_0024    1375232.1| Serine pro0teasep.c5precagrrseoenMt u) [Escherichia coli 55989]
spates.fa        MiSeq (contigs)       CLC            gi|218697865|ref|YP_0024    1375232.1| Serine pro0teasep.c5precagrrseoenMt u) [Escherichia coli 55989]

spates.fa        MiSeq (scaffolds)     Velvet         gi|218697865|ref|YP_0024    1375232.1| Serine pro0teasep.c5precagrrseoenMt u) [Escherichia coli 55989]
spates.fa        MiSeq (scaffolds)     CLC            gi|218697865|ref|YP_0024    1375232.1| Serine pro0teasep.c5precagrrseoenMt u) [Escherichia coli 55989]

spates.fa        280 Reference         Reference      gi|30064291|ref|NP_83841    62.15| serine0proteas0[Sh1ge.la0lexangrieaesntrt. 2457T]
spates.fa        454 Junior (1)        Newbler        gi|30064291|ref|NP_838466    2.19| serine0proteas0[Shige.la4lexdnisir2eatre.n2t457T]
spates.fa        454 Junior (1)        MIRA           gi|30064291|ref|NP_838468    2.16| serine0proteas0[Shige.la4lexdnisir2eatre.n2t457T]

spates.fa        454 Junior (1+2)      Newbler        gi|30064291|ref|NP_83841    62.15| serine0proteas0[Sh1ge.la0lexangrieaesntrt. 2457T]
spates.fa        454 Junior (1+2)      MIRA           gi|30064291|ref|NP_838468    2.16| serine0proteas0[Shige.la4lexdnisir2eatre.n2t457T]

spates.fa        454 Junior (2)        Newbler        gi|30064291|ref|NP_83841    62.15| serine0proteas0[Sh1ge.la0lexangrieaesntrt. 2457T]
spates.fa        454 Junior (2)        MIRA           gi|30064291|ref|NP_838466    2.19| serine0proteas0[Shige.la4lexdnisir2eatre.n2t457T]
spates.fa        C236-11               Reference      gi|30064291|ref|NP_83841    62.15| serine0proteas0[Sh1ge.la0lexangrieaesntrt. 2457T]

spates.fa        Ion Torrent (1)       Newbler        gi|30064291|ref|NP_83841    62.15| serine0proteas0[Sh1ge.la0lexangrieaesntrt. 2457T]
spates.fa        Ion Torrent (1)       MIRA           gi|30064291|ref|NP_83841    62.15| serine0proteas0[Sh1ge.la0lexangrieaesntrt. 2457T]
spates.fa        Ion Torrent (1+2)     Newbler        gi|30064291|ref|NP_83841    62.15| serine0proteas0[Sh1ge.la0lexangrieaesntrt. 2457T]

spates.fa        Ion Torrent (1+2)     MIRA           gi|30064291|ref|NP_83841    62.15| serine0proteas0[Sh1ge.la0lexangrieaesntrt. 2457T]
spates.fa        Ion Torrent (2)       Newbler        gi|30064291|ref|NP_83841    62.15| serine0proteas0[Sh1ge.la0lexangrieaesntrt. 2457T]

spates.fa        Ion Torrent (2)       MIRA           gi|30064291|ref|NP_83841    62.15| serine0proteas0[Sh1ge.la0lexangrieaesntrt. 2457T]
spates.fa        MiSeq (contigs)       MIRA           gi|30064291|ref|NP_83841    62.15| serine0proteas0[Sh1ge.la0lexangrieaesntrt. 2457T]
spates.fa        MiSeq (contigs)       Velvet         gi|30064291|ref|NP_83841    62.15| serine0proteas0[Sh1ge.la0lexangrieaesntrt. 2457T]

spates.fa        MiSeq (contigs)       CLC            gi|30064291|ref|NP_83841    62.19| serine0proteas0[Shige.la4lexdnisir2eatre.n2t457T]
spates.fa        MiSeq (scaffolds)     Velvet         gi|30064291|ref|NP_83841    62.15| serine0proteas0[Sh1ge.la0lexangrieaesntrt. 2457T]

spates.fa        MiSeq (scaffolds)     CLC            gi|30064291|ref|NP_83841    62.17| serine2proteas2[Sh1ge.la0lexdnisir2eatre.n2t457T]
spates.fa        280 Reference         Reference      gi|331681632|ref|ZP_083812327625.1| se5r0ine prot1ase 9i6[E3chaegrria enlti H299]
spates.fa        454 Junior (1)        Newbler        gi|331681632|ref|ZP_083812327625.1| se5r0ine prot1ase 9i6[E3chaegrria enlti H299]

spates.fa        454 Junior (1)        MIRA           gi|331681632|ref|ZP_083812327625.1| se5r0ine prot1ase 9i6[E3chaegrria enlti H299]
spates.fa        454 Junior (1+2)      Newbler        gi|331681632|ref|ZP_083812327625.1| se5r0ine prot1ase 9i6[E3chaegrria enlti H299]

spates.fa        454 Junior (1+2)      MIRA           gi|331681632|ref|ZP_08382925635.1| se 4r1ine prot1ase 6i6[E2chdeicgrieeolint299]
spates.fa        454 Junior (2)        Newbler        gi|331681632|ref|ZP_083812327625.1| se5r0ine prot1ase 9i6[E3chaegrria enlti H299]
spates.fa        454 Junior (2)        MIRA           gi|331681632|ref|ZP_08382928675.1| se 4r2ine prot1ase 6i8[E3chdeicgrieeolint299]

spates.fa        C236-11               Reference      gi|331681632|ref|ZP_083812327625.1| se5r0ine prot1ase 9i6[E3chaegrria enlti H299]
spates.fa        Ion Torrent (1)       Newbler        gi|331681632|ref|ZP_083812228655.1| se5r0ine prot1ase 9i0[E8chdeicgrieeolint299]

spates.fa        Ion Torrent (1)       MIRA           gi|331681632|ref|ZP_083812326635.1| se5r3ine prot1ase 9i5[E5chdeicgrieeolint299]
spates.fa        Ion Torrent (1+2)     Newbler        gi|331681632|ref|ZP_083812327625.1| se5r0ine prot1ase 9i6[E3chaegrria enlti H299]
spates.fa        Ion Torrent (1+2)     MIRA           gi|331681632|ref|ZP_08382527625.1| se 1r3ine prot0ase 4i0[E7chdeicgrieeolint299]

spates.fa        Ion Torrent (2)       Newbler        gi|331681632|ref|ZP_083812327625.1| se5r0ine prot1ase 9i6[E3chaegrria enlti H299]
spates.fa        Ion Torrent (2)       MIRA           gi|331681632|ref|ZP_08382822675.1|3  s6r6ine prot8ase 3i3[E3chdeicgrieeolint299]
spates.fa        MiSeq (contigs)       MIRA          gi|331681632|ref|ZP_083812328645.1|6 s1r2ine prt2ase 5i6c[E1cheircgreeolint299]
spates.fa        MiSeq (contigs)       Velvet        gi|331681632|ref|ZP_083812327625.1| se5r0ine pro1ase 9i6c[E3chaegrra enlti H299]
spates.fa        MiSeq (contigs)       CLC           gi|331681632|ref|ZP_083812327625.1| se5r0ine pro1ase 9i6c[E3chaegrra enlti H299]

spates.fa        MiSeq (scaffolds)     Velvet        gi|331681632|ref|ZP_083812327625.1| se5r0ine pro1ase 9i6c[E3chaegrra enlti H299]
spates.fa        MiSeq (scaffolds)     CLC           gi|331681632|ref|ZP_083812327625.1| se5r0ine pro1ase 9i6c[E3chaegrra enlti H299]

spates.fa        280 Reference         Reference     gi|58045130|gb|AAW6490102.6   1| SepA [Shigella lexne9ri].45% agreement
spates.fa        454 Junior (1)        Newbler       gi|58045130|gb|AAW649007.9    1| SepA [Shigella lexne6ri].84% disagreement
spates.fa        454 Junior (1)        MIRA          gi|58045130|gb|AAW649008.6    1| SepA1[Shigella lexne6ri].35% disagreement

spates.fa        454 Junior (1+2)      Newbler       gi|58045130|gb|AAW6490102.1   1| SepA [Shigella lexne9ri].64% disagreement
spates.fa        454 Junior (1+2)      MIRA          gi|58045130|gb|AAW6490101.0   1| SepA1[Shigella lexne8ri].82% disagreement

spates.fa        454 Junior (2)        Newbler       gi|58045130|gb|AAW649009.2    1| SepA [Shigella lexne7ri].74% disagreement
spates.fa        454 Junior (2)        MIRA          gi|58045130|gb|AAW649008.9    1| SepA44Shigella3lexne3ri].82% disagreement
spates.fa        C236-11               Reference     gi|58045130|gb|AAW6490101.6   1| SepA [Shigella lexne9ri].68% disagreement

spates.fa        Ion Torrent (1)       Newbler       gi|58045130|gb|AAW6490101.9   1| SepA55Shigella3lexne5ri].11% disagreement
spates.fa        Ion Torrent (1)       MIRA          gi|58045130|gb|AAW649009.3    1| SepA [Shigella lexne7ri].45% disagreement

spates.fa        Ion Torrent (1+2)     Newbler       gi|58045130|gb|AAW649008.1    1| SepA [Shigella lexne6ri].79% disagreement
spates.fa        Ion Torrent (1+2)     MIRA          gi|58045130|gb|AAW649006.4    1| SepA [Shigella lexne5ri].71% disagreement
spates.fa        Ion Torrent (2)       Newbler       gi|58045130|gb|AAW649007.9    1| SepA [Shigella lexne6ri].20% disagreement

spates.fa        Ion Torrent (2)       MIRA          gi|58045130|gb|AAW649008.1    1| SepA [Shigella lexne6ri].87% disagreement
spates.fa        MiSeq (contigs)       MIRA          gi|58045130|gb|AAW6490102.6   1| SepA1[Shigella lexne9ri].29% disagreement

spates.fa        MiSeq (contigs)       Velvet        gi|58045130|gb|AAW649008.6    1| SepA [Shigella lexne6ri].75% disagreement
spates.fa        MiSeq (contigs)       CLC           gi|58045130|gb|AAW649009.2    1| SepA [Shigella lexne7ri].22% disagreement
spates.fa        MiSeq (scaffolds)     Velvet        gi|58045130|gb|AAW649008.6    1| SepA [Shigella lexne6ri].75% disagreement

spates.fa        MiSeq (scaffolds)     CLC           gi|58045130|gb|AAW649009.2    1| SepA [Shigella lexne7ri].22% disagreement
antigens.fa      280 Reference         Reference     gi|14517807|gb|AAK64372.317|0  AF36137 11_7 Wzy0[Esc9h9e.r7ic3h%ii]emente

antigens.fa      454 Junior (1)        Newbler       gi|14517807|gb|AAK64372.17|6   AF3613 561_7 Wz1y1[Esch5e.r4ic1h%li]greement
antigens.fa      454 Junior (1)        MIRA          gi|14517807|gb|AAK64372.17|6   AF3613 561_7 Wz1y1[Esch5e.r4ic1h%li]greement
antigens.fa      454 Junior (1+2)      Newbler       gi|14517807|gb|AAK64372.17|6   AF3613 561_7 Wz1y1[Esch5e.r4ic1h%li]greement

antigens.fa      454 Junior (1+2)      MIRA          gi|14517807|gb|AAK64372.17|6   AF3613 561_7 Wz1y1[Esch5e.r4ic1h%li]greement
antigens.fa      454 Junior (2)        Newbler       gi|14517807|gb|AAK64372.17|6   AF3613 561_7 Wz1y1[Esch5e.r4ic1h%li]greement

antigens.fa      454 Junior (2)        MIRA          gi|14517807|gb|AAK64372.17|6   AF3613 561_7 Wz1y1[Esch5e.r4ic1h%li]greement
antigens.fa      C236-11               Reference     gi|14517807|gb|AAK64372.317|0  AF36137 11_7 Wzy0[Esc9h9e.r7ic3h%ii]emente
antigens.fa      Ion Torrent (1)       Newbler       gi|14517807|gb|AAK64372.317|0  AF36137 11_7 Wzy0[Esc9h9e.r7ic3h%ii]emente

antigens.fa      Ion Torrent (1)       MIRA          gi|14517807|gb|AAK64372.312|3  AF36137 21_7 Wzy0[Esc8h6e.r7ic6h%li]greement
antigens.fa      Ion Torrent (1+2)     Newbler       gi|14517807|gb|AAK64372.317|0  AF36137 11_7 Wzy0[Esc9h9e.r7ic3h%ii]emente

antigens.fa      Ion Torrent (1+2)     MIRA          gi|14517807|gb|AAK64372.312|3  AF36137 11_7 Wzy0[Esc8h7e.r0ic3h%li]greement
antigens.fa      Ion Torrent (2)       Newbler       gi|14517807|gb|AAK64372.312|3  AF36137 11_7 Wzy0[Esc8h7e.r0ic3h%li]greement
antigens.fa      Ion Torrent (2)       MIRA          gi|14517807|gb|AAK64372.311|5  AF36137 11_7 Wzy0[Esc8h4e.r8ic6h%li]greement

antigens.fa      MiSeq (contigs)       MIRA          gi|14517807|gb|AAK64372.317|0  AF36137 11_7 Wzy0[Esc9h9e.r7ic3h%ii]emente
antigens.fa      MiSeq (contigs)       Velvet        gi|14517807|gb|AAK64372.317|0  AF36137 11_7 Wzy0[Esc9h9e.r7ic3h%ii]emente
antigens.fa      MiSeq (contigs)       CLC           gi|14517807|gb|AAK64372.317|0  AF36137 11_7 Wzy0[Esc9h9e.r7ic3h%ii]emente

antigens.fa      MiSeq (scaffolds)     Velvet        gi|14517807|gb|AAK64372.317|0  AF36137 11_7 Wzy0[Esc9h9e.r7ic3h%ii]emente
antigens.fa      MiSeq (scaffolds)     CLC           gi|14517807|gb|AAK64372.317|0  AF36137 11_7 Wzy0[Esc9h9e.r7ic3h%ii]emente

antigens.fa      280 Reference         Reference     gi|14517809|gb|AAK64374.413|1  AF36137 11_9 Wzx0[Esc9h9e.r7iiaacgi]ement
antigens.fa      454 Junior (1)        Newbler       gi|14517809|gb|AAK64374.314|2  AF36137 41_9 Wzx0[Esc7h8e.r4iiadcioslai]greement
antigens.fa      454 Junior (1)        MIRA          gi|14517809|gb|AAK64374.15|7   AF3613 411_9 Wzx1[Esch3 e.r7iiadcioslai]greement

antigens.fa      454 Junior (1+2)      Newbler       gi|14517809|gb|AAK64374.312|7  AF36137 11_9 Wzx0[Esc7h5e.r6iiadcioslai]greement
antigens.fa      454 Junior (1+2)      MIRA          gi|14517809|gb|AAK64374.217|9  AF36137 71_9 Wzx0[Esc6h3e.r1iiadcioslai]greement

antigens.fa      454 Junior (2)        Newbler       gi|14517809|gb|AAK64374.216|9  AF3613 711_9 Wzx2[Esc4h5e.r9iiadcioslai]greement
antigens.fa      454 Junior (2)        MIRA          gi|14517809|gb|AAK64374.12|1   AF36137 21_9 Wzx0[Esch4 e.r4iiadcioslai]greement
antigens.fa      C236-11               Reference     gi|14517809|gb|AAK64374.413|1  AF36137 11_9 Wzx0[Esc9h9e.r7iiaacgi]ement

antigens.fa      Ion Torrent (1)       Newbler       gi|14517809|gb|AAK64374.413|1  AF36137 11_9 Wzx0[Esc9h9e.r7iiaacgi]ement
antigens.fa      Ion Torrent (1)       MIRA          gi|14517809|gb|AAK64374.310|9  AF36137 01_9 Wzx0[Esc7h1e.r6iiadcioslai]greement

antigens.fa      Ion Torrent (1+2)     Newbler       gi|14517809|gb|AAK64374.413|1  AF36137 11_9 Wzx0[Esc9h9e.r7iiaacgi]ement
antigens.fa      Ion Torrent (1+2)     MIRA          gi|14517809|gb|AAK64374.413|1  AF36137 11_9 Wzx0[Esc9h9e.r7iiaacgi]ement
antigens.fa      Ion Torrent (2)       Newbler       gi|14517809|gb|AAK64374.311|0  AF36137 01_9 Wzx0[Esc7h1e.r9iiadcioslai]greement

antigens.fa      Ion Torrent (2)       MIRA          gi|14517809|gb|AAK64374.310|6  AF36137 01_9 Wzx0[Esc7h1e.r0iiadcioslai]greement
antigens.fa      MiSeq (contigs)       MIRA          gi|14517809|gb|AAK64374.413|1  AF36137 11_9 Wzx0[Esc9h9e.r7iiaacgi]ement

antigens.fa      MiSeq (contigs)       Velvet        gi|14517809|gb|AAK64374.413|1  AF36137 11_9 Wzx0[Esc9h9e.r7iiaacgi]ement
antigens.fa      MiSeq (contigs)       CLC           gi|14517809|gb|AAK64374.413|1  AF36137 11_9 Wzx0[Esc9h9e.r7iiaacgi]ement
antigens.fa      MiSeq (scaffolds)     Velvet        gi|14517809|gb|AAK64374.413|1  AF36137 11_9 Wzx0[Esc9h9e.r7iiaacgi]ement

antigens.fa      MiSeq (scaffolds)     CLC           gi|14517809|gb|AAK64374.413|1  AF36137 11_9 Wzx0[Esc9h9e.r7iiaacgi]ement
stx2.fa          280 Reference         Reference     stx2A                        319       0        0   100.00% agreement
stx2.fa        454 Junior (1)      Newbler      stx2A                    319       0       0  100.00% agreement
stx2.fa        454 Junior (1)      MIRA         stx2A                    206       1       0   64.26% disagreement
stx2.fa        454 Junior (1+2)    Newbler      stx2A                    319       0       0  100.00% agreement

stx2.fa        454 Junior (1+2)    MIRA         stx2A                    319       0       0  100.00% agreement
stx2.fa        454 Junior (2)      Newbler      stx2A                    319       0       0  100.00% agreement

stx2.fa        454 Junior (2)      MIRA         stx2A                    292       0       0   91.54% disagreement
stx2.fa        C236-11             Reference    stx2A                    319       0       0  100.00% agreement
stx2.fa        Ion Torrent (1)     Newbler      stx2A                    319       0       0  100.00% agreement

stx2.fa        Ion Torrent (1)     MIRA         stx2A                    319       0       0  100.00% agreement
stx2.fa        Ion Torrent (1+2)   Newbler      stx2A                    198       6       3   60.19% disagreement

stx2.fa        Ion Torrent (1+2)   MIRA         stx2A                    319       0       0  100.00% agreement
stx2.fa        Ion Torrent (2)     Newbler      stx2A                    319       0       0  100.00% agreement
stx2.fa        Ion Torrent (2)     MIRA         stx2A                    198       6       3   60.19% disagreement

stx2.fa        MiSeq (contigs)     MIRA         stx2A                    319       0       0  100.00% agreement
stx2.fa        MiSeq (contigs)     Velvet       stx2A                    319       0       0  100.00% agreement

stx2.fa        MiSeq (contigs)     CLC          stx2A                    319       0       0  100.00% agreement
stx2.fa        MiSeq (scaffolds)   Velvet       stx2A                    319       0       0  100.00% agreement
stx2.fa        MiSeq (scaffolds)   CLC          stx2A                    319       0       0  100.00% agreement

stx2.fa        280 Reference       Reference    stx2B                     89       0       0  100.00% agreement
stx2.fa        454 Junior (1)      Newbler      stx2B                     89       0       0  100.00% agreement

stx2.fa        454 Junior (1)      MIRA         stx2B                     89       0       0  100.00% agreement
stx2.fa        454 Junior (1+2)    Newbler      stx2B                     89       0       0  100.00% agreement
stx2.fa        454 Junior (1+2)    MIRA         stx2B                     89       0       0  100.00% agreement

stx2.fa        454 Junior (2)      Newbler      stx2B                     89       0       0  100.00% agreement
stx2.fa        454 Junior (2)      MIRA         stx2B                     77       0       0   86.52% disagreement

stx2.fa        C236-11             Reference    stx2B                     89       0       0  100.00% agreement
stx2.fa        Ion Torrent (1)     Newbler      stx2B                     89       0       0  100.00% agreement
stx2.fa        Ion Torrent (1)     MIRA         stx2B                     89       0       0  100.00% agreement

stx2.fa        Ion Torrent (1+2)   Newbler      stx2B                     89       0       0  100.00% agreement
stx2.fa        Ion Torrent (1+2)   MIRA         stx2B                     89       0       0  100.00% agreement

stx2.fa        Ion Torrent (2)     Newbler      stx2B                     89       0       0  100.00% agreement
stx2.fa        Ion Torrent (2)     MIRA         stx2B                     89       0       0  100.00% agreement
stx2.fa        MiSeq (contigs)     MIRA         stx2B                     89       0       0  100.00% agreement

stx2.fa        MiSeq (contigs)     Velvet       stx2B                     89       0       0  100.00% agreement
stx2.fa        MiSeq (contigs)     CLC          stx2B                     89       0       0  100.00% agreement

stx2.fa        MiSeq (scaffolds)   Velvet       stx2B                     89       0       0  100.00% agreement
stx2.fa        MiSeq (scaffolds)   CLC          stx2B                     89       0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   280 Reference       Reference    TerA                     385       0       0  100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   454 Junior (1)      Newbler      TerA                     385       0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   454 Junior (1)      MIRA         TerA                     385       0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   454 Junior (1+2)    Newbler      TerA                     385       0       0  100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   454 Junior (1+2)    MIRA         TerA                     385       0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   454 Junior (2)      Newbler      TerA                     385       0       0  100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   454 Junior (2)      MIRA         TerA                     385       0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   C236-11             Reference    TerA                     385       0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (1)     Newbler      TerA                     287       0       0   74.55% disagreement

tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (1)     MIRA         TerA                     379       2       0   97.92% disagreement
tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (1+2)   Newbler      TerA                     287       0       0   74.55% disagreement

tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (1+2)   MIRA         TerA                     380       2       0   98.18% disagreement
tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (2)     Newbler      TerA                     385       0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (2)     MIRA         TerA                     380       2       0   98.18% disagreement

tellerium.fa   MiSeq (contigs)     MIRA         TerA                     385       0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   MiSeq (contigs)     Velvet       TerA                     385       0       0  100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   MiSeq (contigs)     CLC          TerA                     385       0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   MiSeq (scaffolds)   Velvet       TerA                     385       0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   MiSeq (scaffolds)   CLC          TerA                     385       0       0  100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   280 Reference       Reference    TerB                     151       0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   454 Junior (1)      Newbler      TerB                     151       0       0  100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   454 Junior (1)      MIRA         TerB                     151       0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   454 Junior (1+2)    Newbler      TerB                     151       0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   454 Junior (1+2)    MIRA         TerB                     151       0       0  100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   454 Junior (2)      Newbler      TerB                     151       0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   454 Junior (2)      MIRA         TerB                     151       0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   C236-11            Reference     TerB                     151      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (1)    Newbler       TerB                     151      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (1)    MIRA          TerB                     151      0       0   100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (1+2)  Newbler       TerB                     151      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (1+2)  MIRA          TerB                     151      0       0   100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (2)    Newbler       TerB                     151      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (2)    MIRA          TerB                     151      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   MiSeq (contigs)    MIRA          TerB                     151      0       0   100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   MiSeq (contigs)    Velvet        TerB                     151      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   MiSeq (contigs)    CLC           TerB                     151      0       0   100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   MiSeq (scaffolds)  Velvet        TerB                     151      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   MiSeq (scaffolds)  CLC           TerB                     151      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   280 Reference      Reference     TerC                     346      0       0   100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   454 Junior (1)     Newbler       TerC                     346      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   454 Junior (1)     MIRA          TerC                     346      0       0   100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   454 Junior (1+2)   Newbler       TerC                     346      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   454 Junior (1+2)   MIRA          TerC                     346      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   454 Junior (2)     Newbler       TerC                     346      0       0   100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   454 Junior (2)     MIRA          TerC                     346      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   C236-11            Reference     TerC                     346      0       0   100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (1)    Newbler       TerC                     346      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (1)    MIRA          TerC                     346      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (1+2)  Newbler       TerC                     346      0       0   100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (1+2)  MIRA          TerC                     346      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (2)    Newbler       TerC                     346      0       0   100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (2)    MIRA          TerC                     346      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   MiSeq (contigs)    MIRA          TerC                     346      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   MiSeq (contigs)    Velvet        TerC                     346      0       0   100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   MiSeq (contigs)    CLC           TerC                     346      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   MiSeq (scaffolds)  Velvet        TerC                     346      0       0   100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   MiSeq (scaffolds)  CLC           TerC                     346      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   280 Reference      Reference     TerD                     192      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   454 Junior (1)     Newbler       TerD                     192      0       0   100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   454 Junior (1)     MIRA          TerD                     192      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   454 Junior (1+2)   Newbler       TerD                     192      0       0   100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   454 Junior (1+2)   MIRA          TerD                     192      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   454 Junior (2)     Newbler       TerD                     192      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   454 Junior (2)     MIRA          TerD                     192      0       0   100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   C236-11            Reference     TerD                     192      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (1)    Newbler       TerD                     154      0       0    80.21% disagreement
tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (1)    MIRA          TerD                     154      0       0    80.21% disagreement

tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (1+2)  Newbler       TerD                     192      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (1+2)  MIRA          TerD                     154      0       0    80.21% disagreement

tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (2)    Newbler       TerD                     154      0       0    80.21% disagreement
tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (2)    MIRA          TerD                     154      0       0    80.21% disagreement
tellerium.fa   MiSeq (contigs)    MIRA          TerD                     192      0       0   100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   MiSeq (contigs)    Velvet        TerD                     192      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   MiSeq (contigs)    CLC           TerD                     192      0       0   100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   MiSeq (scaffolds)  Velvet        TerD                     192      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   MiSeq (scaffolds)  CLC           TerD                     192      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   280 Reference      Reference     TerE                     191      0       0   100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   454 Junior (1)     Newbler       TerE                     191      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   454 Junior (1)     MIRA          TerE                     191      0       0   100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   454 Junior (1+2)   Newbler       TerE                     191      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   454 Junior (1+2)   MIRA          TerE                     191      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   454 Junior (2)     Newbler       TerE                     191      0       0   100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   454 Junior (2)     MIRA          TerE                     150      0       0    78.53% disagreement
tellerium.fa   C236-11            Reference     TerE                     191      0       0   100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (1)    Newbler       TerE                     191      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (1)    MIRA          TerE                     132      7       0    65.45% disagreement
tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (1+2)  Newbler       TerE                     132      7       0    65.45% disagreement

tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (1+2)  MIRA          TerE                     191      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (2)    Newbler       TerE                     132      7       0    65.45% disagreement
tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (2)    MIRA         TerE                     191       0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   MiSeq (contigs)    MIRA         TerE                     191       0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   MiSeq (contigs)    Velvet       TerE                     191       0       0  100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   MiSeq (contigs)    CLC          TerE                     191       0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   MiSeq (scaffolds)  Velvet       TerE                     191       0       0  100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   MiSeq (scaffolds)  CLC          TerE                     191       0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   280 Reference      Reference    TerF                     413       0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   454 Junior (1)     Newbler      TerF                     413       0       0  100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   454 Junior (1)     MIRA         TerF                     210    122      12    21.31% disagreement
tellerium.fa   454 Junior (1+2)   Newbler      TerF                     413       0       0  100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   454 Junior (1+2)   MIRA         TerF                     413       0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   454 Junior (2)     Newbler      TerF                     413       0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   454 Junior (2)     MIRA         TerF                     210    122      12    21.31% disagreement

tellerium.fa   C236-11            Reference    TerF                     413       0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (1)    Newbler      TerF                     291       0       0   70.46% disagreement

tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (1)    MIRA         TerF                     291       0       0   70.46% disagreement
tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (1+2)  Newbler      TerF                     291       0       0   70.46% disagreement
tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (1+2)  MIRA         TerF                     291       0       0   70.46% disagreement

tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (2)    Newbler      TerF                     291       0       0   70.46% disagreement
tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (2)    MIRA         TerF                     291       0       0   70.46% disagreement

tellerium.fa   MiSeq (contigs)    MIRA         TerF                     413       0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   MiSeq (contigs)    Velvet       TerF                     413       0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   MiSeq (contigs)    CLC          TerF                     413       0       0  100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   MiSeq (scaffolds)  Velvet       TerF                     413       0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   MiSeq (scaffolds)  CLC          TerF                     413       0       0  100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   280 Reference      Reference    TerW                       77      0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   454 Junior (1)     Newbler      TerW                       77      0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   454 Junior (1)     MIRA         TerW                       42      0       0   54.55% disagreement

tellerium.fa   454 Junior (1+2)   Newbler      TerW                       77      0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   454 Junior (1+2)   MIRA         TerW                       77      0       0  100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   454 Junior (2)     Newbler      TerW                       42      0       0   54.55% disagreement
tellerium.fa   454 Junior (2)     MIRA         TerW                       77      0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   C236-11            Reference    TerW                       77      0       0  100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (1)    Newbler      TerW                       77      0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (1)    MIRA         TerW                       51      0       0   66.23% disagreement

tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (1+2)  Newbler      TerW                       77      0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (1+2)  MIRA         TerW                       77      0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (2)    Newbler      TerW                       77      0       0  100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (2)    MIRA         TerW                       77      0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   MiSeq (contigs)    MIRA         TerW                       77      0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   MiSeq (contigs)    Velvet       TerW                       77      0       0  100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   MiSeq (contigs)    CLC          TerW                       77      0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   MiSeq (scaffolds)  Velvet       TerW                       77      0       0  100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   MiSeq (scaffolds)  CLC          TerW                       77      0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   280 Reference      Reference    TerX                     212       0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   454 Junior (1)     Newbler      TerX                     212       0       0  100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   454 Junior (1)     MIRA         TerX                     212       0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   454 Junior (1+2)   Newbler      TerX                     212       0       0  100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   454 Junior (1+2)   MIRA         TerX                     212       0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   454 Junior (2)     Newbler      TerX                     212       0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   454 Junior (2)     MIRA         TerX                     212       0       0  100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   C236-11            Reference    TerX                     212       0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (1)    Newbler      TerX                     212       0       0  100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (1)    MIRA         TerX                     203       4       0   93.87% disagreement
tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (1+2)  Newbler      TerX                     212       0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (1+2)  MIRA         TerX                     212       0       0  100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (2)    Newbler      TerX                     212       0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (2)    MIRA         TerX                     203       0       0   95.75% disagreement

tellerium.fa   MiSeq (contigs)    MIRA         TerX                     212       0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   MiSeq (contigs)    Velvet       TerX                     212       0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   MiSeq (contigs)    CLC          TerX                     212       0       0  100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   MiSeq (scaffolds)  Velvet       TerX                     212       0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   MiSeq (scaffolds)  CLC          TerX                     212       0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   280 Reference      Reference     TerY1                    197      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   454 Junior (1)     Newbler       TerY1                    197      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   454 Junior (1)     MIRA          TerY1                    197      0       0   100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   454 Junior (1+2)   Newbler       TerY1                    197      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   454 Junior (1+2)   MIRA          TerY1                    197      0       0   100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   454 Junior (2)     Newbler       TerY1                    197      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   454 Junior (2)     MIRA          TerY1                    197      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   C236-11            Reference     TerY1                    197      0       0   100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (1)    Newbler       TerY1                    197      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (1)    MIRA          TerY1                    197      0       0   100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (1+2)  Newbler       TerY1                    197      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (1+2)  MIRA          TerY1                    197      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (2)    Newbler       TerY1                    197      0       0   100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (2)    MIRA          TerY1                    197      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   MiSeq (contigs)    MIRA          TerY1                    197      0       0   100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   MiSeq (contigs)    Velvet        TerY1                    197      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   MiSeq (contigs)    CLC           TerY1                    197      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   MiSeq (scaffolds)  Velvet        TerY1                    197      0       0   100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   MiSeq (scaffolds)  CLC           TerY1                    197      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   280 Reference      Reference     TerY2                    212      0       0   100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   454 Junior (1)     Newbler       TerY2                    212      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   454 Junior (1)     MIRA          TerY2                    212      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   454 Junior (1+2)   Newbler       TerY2                    212      0       0   100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   454 Junior (1+2)   MIRA          TerY2                    212      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   454 Junior (2)     Newbler       TerY2                    212      0       0   100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   454 Junior (2)     MIRA          TerY2                    212      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   C236-11            Reference     TerY2                    212      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (1)    Newbler       TerY2                    212      0       0   100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (1)    MIRA          TerY2                    212      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (1+2)  Newbler       TerY2                    212      0       0   100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (1+2)  MIRA          TerY2                    212      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (2)    Newbler       TerY2                    212      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (2)    MIRA          TerY2                    212      0       0   100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   MiSeq (contigs)    MIRA          TerY2                    212      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   MiSeq (contigs)    Velvet        TerY2                    212      0       0   100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   MiSeq (contigs)    CLC           TerY2                    212      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   MiSeq (scaffolds)  Velvet        TerY2                    212      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   MiSeq (scaffolds)  CLC           TerY2                    212      0       0   100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   280 Reference      Reference     TerY3                    346      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   454 Junior (1)     Newbler       TerY3                    346      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   454 Junior (1)     MIRA          TerY3                    343      4       0    97.98% disagreement

tellerium.fa   454 Junior (1+2)   Newbler       TerY3                    346      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   454 Junior (1+2)   MIRA          TerY3                    346      0       0   100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   454 Junior (2)     Newbler       TerY3                    326      1       0    93.93% disagreement
tellerium.fa   454 Junior (2)     MIRA          TerY3                    346      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   C236-11            Reference     TerY3                    346      0       0   100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (1)    Newbler       TerY3                    346      1       0    99.71% disagreement
tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (1)    MIRA          TerY3                    346      1       0    99.71% disagreement

tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (1+2)  Newbler       TerY3                    346      1       0    99.71% disagreement
tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (1+2)  MIRA          TerY3                    346      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (2)    Newbler       TerY3                    343      1       0    98.84% disagreement

tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (2)    MIRA          TerY3                    346      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   MiSeq (contigs)    MIRA          TerY3                    346      0       0   100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   MiSeq (contigs)    Velvet        TerY3                    346      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   MiSeq (contigs)    CLC           TerY3                    346      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   MiSeq (scaffolds)  Velvet        TerY3                    346      0       0   100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   MiSeq (scaffolds)  CLC           TerY3                    346      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   280 Reference      Reference     TerZ                     193      0       0   100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   454 Junior (1)     Newbler       TerZ                     193      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   454 Junior (1)     MIRA          TerZ                     193      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   454 Junior (1+2)   Newbler       TerZ                     193      0       0   100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   454 Junior (1+2)   MIRA          TerZ                     193      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   454 Junior (2)     Newbler       TerZ                     193      0       0   100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   454 Junior (2)      MIRA         TerZ                     193       0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   C236-11             Reference    TerZ                     193       0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (1)     Newbler      TerZ                     193       0       0  100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (1)     MIRA         TerZ                     193       0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (1+2)   Newbler      TerZ                     193       0       0  100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (1+2)   MIRA         TerZ                     193       0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (2)     Newbler      TerZ                     193       0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   Ion Torrent (2)     MIRA         TerZ                     193       0       0  100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   MiSeq (contigs)     MIRA         TerZ                     193       0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   MiSeq (contigs)     Velvet       TerZ                     193       0       0  100.00% agreement

tellerium.fa   MiSeq (contigs)     CLC          TerZ                     193       0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   MiSeq (scaffolds)   Velvet       TerZ                     193       0       0  100.00% agreement
tellerium.fa   MiSeq (scaffolds)   CLC          TerZ                     193       0       0  100.00% agreement

antibiotics.fa 280 Reference       Reference    TetA                     424       0       0  100.00% agreement
antibiotics.fa 454 Junior (1)      Newbler      TetA                     424       0       0  100.00% agreement

antibiotics.fa 454 Junior (1)      MIRA         TetA                     424       0       0  100.00% agreement
antibiotics.fa 454 Junior (1+2)    Newbler      TetA                     424       0       0  100.00% agreement
antibiotics.fa 454 Junior (1+2)    MIRA         TetA                     424       0       0  100.00% agreement

antibiotics.fa 454 Junior (2)      Newbler      TetA                     424       0       0  100.00% agreement
antibiotics.fa 454 Junior (2)      MIRA         TetA                     424       0       0  100.00% agreement

antibiotics.fa C236-11             Reference    TetA                     424       0       0  100.00% agreement
antibiotics.fa Ion Torrent (1)     Newbler      TetA                     424       0       0  100.00% agreement
antibiotics.fa Ion Torrent (1)     MIRA         TetA                     424       0       0  100.00% agreement

antibiotics.fa Ion Torrent (1+2)   Newbler      TetA                     424       0       0  100.00% agreement
antibiotics.fa Ion Torrent (1+2)   MIRA         TetA                     424       0       0  100.00% agreement

antibiotics.fa Ion Torrent (2)     Newbler      TetA                     259       3       0   60.38% disagreement
antibiotics.fa Ion Torrent (2)     MIRA         TetA                     261       0       0   61.56% disagreement
antibiotics.fa MiSeq (contigs)     MIRA         TetA                     424       0       0  100.00% agreement

antibiotics.fa MiSeq (contigs)     Velvet       TetA                     424       0       0  100.00% agreement
antibiotics.fa MiSeq (contigs)     CLC          TetA                     424       0       0  100.00% agreement

antibiotics.fa MiSeq (scaffolds)   Velvet       TetA                     424       0       0  100.00% agreement
antibiotics.fa MiSeq (scaffolds)   CLC          TetA                     424       0       0  100.00% agreement
antibiotics.fa 280 Reference       Reference    blaCTX-M-15              280       0       0  100.00% agreement

antibiotics.fa 454 Junior (1)      Newbler      blaCTX-M-15              262    161        4   36.07% disagreement
antibiotics.fa 454 Junior (1)      MIRA         blaCTX-M-15              262    161        4   36.07% disagreement

antibiotics.fa 454 Junior (1+2)    Newbler      blaCTX-M-15              280       0       0  100.00% agreement
antibiotics.fa 454 Junior (1+2)    MIRA         blaCTX-M-15              280       0       0  100.00% agreement
antibiotics.fa 454 Junior (2)      Newbler      blaCTX-M-15              280       0       0  100.00% agreement

antibiotics.fa 454 Junior (2)      MIRA         blaCTX-M-15               87      61      17    9.29% disagreement
antibiotics.fa C236-11             Reference    blaCTX-M-15              280       0       0  100.00% agreement
antibiotics.fa Ion Torrent (1)     Newbler      blaCTX-M-15              280       0       0  100.00% agreement

antibiotics.fa Ion Torrent (1)     MIRA         blaCTX-M-15              280       0       0  100.00% agreement
antibiotics.fa Ion Torrent (1+2)   Newbler      blaCTX-M-15              280       0       0  100.00% agreement

antibiotics.fa Ion Torrent (1+2)   MIRA         blaCTX-M-15              280       0       0  100.00% agreement
antibiotics.fa Ion Torrent (2)     Newbler      blaCTX-M-15              280       0       0  100.00% agreement
antibiotics.fa Ion Torrent (2)     MIRA         blaCTX-M-15              280       0       0  100.00% agreement

antibiotics.fa MiSeq (contigs)     MIRA         blaCTX-M-15              280       0       0  100.00% agreement
antibiotics.fa MiSeq (contigs)     Velvet       blaCTX-M-15              280       0       0  100.00% agreement

antibiotics.fa MiSeq (contigs)     CLC          blaCTX-M-15              280       0       0  100.00% agreement
antibiotics.fa MiSeq (scaffolds)   Velvet       blaCTX-M-15              280       0       0  100.00% agreement
antibiotics.fa MiSeq (scaffolds)   CLC          blaCTX-M-15              280       0       0  100.00% agreement

antibiotics.fa 280 Reference       Reference    blaT                      52       1       0   85.00% agreement
antibiotics.fa 454 Junior (1)      Newbler      blaT                      52       1       0   85.00% agreement

antibiotics.fa 454 Junior (1)      MIRA         blaT                      52       1       0   85.00% agreement
antibiotics.fa 454 Junior (1+2)    Newbler      blaT                      52       1       0   85.00% agreement
antibiotics.fa 454 Junior (1+2)    MIRA         blaT                      52       1       0   85.00% agreement

antibiotics.fa 454 Junior (2)      Newbler      blaT                      52       1       0   85.00% agreement
antibiotics.fa 454 Junior (2)      MIRA         blaT                      39      24       0   25.00% disagreement

antibiotics.fa C236-11             Reference    blaT                      52       1       0   85.00% agreement
antibiotics.fa Ion Torrent (1)     Newbler      blaT                      52       1       0   85.00% agreement
antibiotics.fa Ion Torrent (1)     MIRA         blaT                      52       1       0   85.00% agreement

antibiotics.fa Ion Torrent (1+2)   Newbler      blaT                      52       1       0   85.00% agreement
antibiotics.fa Ion Torrent (1+2)   MIRA         blaT                      52       1       0   85.00% agreement
antibiotics.fa   Ion Torrent (2)      Newbler        blaT                         52       1        0    85.00% agreement
antibiotics.fa   Ion Torrent (2)      MIRA           blaT                         52       1        0    85.00% agreement
antibiotics.fa   MiSeq (contigs)      MIRA           blaT                         52       1        0    85.00% agreement

antibiotics.fa   MiSeq (contigs)      Velvet         blaT                         52       1        0    85.00% agreement
antibiotics.fa   MiSeq (contigs)      CLC            blaT                         52       1        0    85.00% agreement

antibiotics.fa   MiSeq (scaffolds)    Velvet         blaT                         52       1        0    85.00% agreement
antibiotics.fa   MiSeq (scaffolds)    CLC            blaT                         52       1        0    85.00% agreement
antibiotics.fa   280 Reference        Reference      blaTEM                      286       0        0   100.00% agreement

antibiotics.fa   454 Junior (1)       Newbler        blaTEM                      286       0        0   100.00% agreement
antibiotics.fa   454 Junior (1)       MIRA           blaTEM                      286       0        0   100.00% agreement

antibiotics.fa   454 Junior (1+2)     Newbler        blaTEM                      286       0        0   100.00% agreement
antibiotics.fa   454 Junior (1+2)     MIRA           blaTEM                      286       0        0   100.00% agreement
antibiotics.fa   454 Junior (2)       Newbler        blaTEM                      286       0        0   100.00% agreement

antibiotics.fa   454 Junior (2)       MIRA           blaTEM                       42      28        2     4.90% disagreement
antibiotics.fa   C236-11              Reference      blaTEM                      286       0        0   100.00% agreement

antibiotics.fa   Ion Torrent (1)      Newbler        blaTEM                      286       0        0   100.00% agreement
antibiotics.fa   Ion Torrent (1)      MIRA           blaTEM                      178       0        0    62.24% disagreement
antibiotics.fa   Ion Torrent (1+2)    Newbler        blaTEM                      286       0        0   100.00% agreement

antibiotics.fa   Ion Torrent (1+2)    MIRA           blaTEM                      178       0        0    62.24% disagreement
antibiotics.fa   Ion Torrent (2)      Newbler        blaTEM                      286       0        0   100.00% agreement

antibiotics.fa   Ion Torrent (2)      MIRA           blaTEM                      178       0        0    62.24% disagreement
antibiotics.fa   MiSeq (contigs)      MIRA           blaTEM                      286       0        0   100.00% agreement
antibiotics.fa   MiSeq (contigs)      Velvet         blaTEM                      286       0        0   100.00% agreement

antibiotics.fa   MiSeq (contigs)      CLC            blaTEM                      286       0        0   100.00% agreement
antibiotics.fa   MiSeq (scaffolds)    Velvet         blaTEM                      286       0        0   100.00% agreement

antibiotics.fa   MiSeq (scaffolds)    CLC            blaTEM                      286       0        0   100.00% agreement
antibiotics.fa   280 Reference        Reference      irod7_orf00018 aminoglycos2id09/hydrox0yurea an0tiboti0re0istagnrcmineanste
antibiotics.fa   454 Junior (1)       Newbler        irod7_orf00018 aminoglycos2id09/hydrox0yurea an0tiboti0re0istagnrcmineanste

antibiotics.fa   454 Junior (1)       MIRA           irod7_orf00018 aminoglycos2id09/hydrox0yurea an0tiboti0re0istagnrcmineanste
antibiotics.fa   454 Junior (1+2)     Newbler        irod7_orf00018 aminoglycos2id09/hydrox0yurea an0tiboti0re0istagnrcmineanste

antibiotics.fa   454 Junior (1+2)     MIRA           irod7_orf00018 aminoglycos2id09/hydrox0yurea an0tiboti0re0istagnrcmineanste
antibiotics.fa   454 Junior (2)       Newbler        irod7_orf00018 aminoglycos2id09/hydrox0yurea an0tiboti0re0istagnrcmineanste
antibiotics.fa   454 Junior (2)       MIRA           irod7_orf00018 aminoglycosid 54/hydro3x8yurea an2tibiotre6istaingrkeeasent

antibiotics.fa   C236-11              Reference      irod7_orf00018 aminoglycos2id09/hydrox0yurea an0tiboti0re0istagnrcmineanste
antibiotics.fa   Ion Torrent (1)      Newbler        irod7_orf00018 aminoglycos2id09/hydrox0yurea an0tiboti0re0istagnrcmineanste

antibiotics.fa   Ion Torrent (1)      MIRA           irod7_orf00018 aminoglycos2id09/hydrox0yurea an0tiboti0re0istagnrcmineanste
antibiotics.fa   Ion Torrent (1+2)    Newbler        irod7_orf00018 aminoglycos2id09/hydrox0yurea an0tiboti0re0istagnrcmineanste
antibiotics.fa   Ion Torrent (1+2)    MIRA           irod7_orf00018 aminoglycos2id09/hydrox0yurea an0tiboti0re0istagnrcmineanste

antibiotics.fa   Ion Torrent (2)      Newbler        irod7_orf00018 aminoglycos2id09/hydrox0yurea an0tiboti0re0istagnrcmineanste
antibiotics.fa   Ion Torrent (2)      MIRA           irod7_orf00018 aminoglycos2id09/hydrox0yurea an0tiboti0re0istagnrcmineanste
antibiotics.fa   MiSeq (contigs)      MIRA           irod7_orf00018 aminoglycos2id09/hydrox0yurea an0tiboti0re0istagnrcmineanste

antibiotics.fa   MiSeq (contigs)      Velvet         irod7_orf00018 aminoglycos2id09/hydrox0yurea an0tiboti0re0istagnrcmineanste
antibiotics.fa   MiSeq (contigs)      CLC            irod7_orf00018 aminoglycos2id09/hydrox0yurea an0tiboti0re0istagnrcmineanste

antibiotics.fa   MiSeq (scaffolds)    Velvet         irod7_orf00018 aminoglycos2id09/hydrox0yurea an0tiboti0re0istagnrcmineanste
antibiotics.fa   MiSeq (scaffolds)    CLC            irod7_orf00018 aminoglycos2id09/hydrox0yurea an0tiboti0re0istagnrcmineanste
antibiotics.fa   280 Reference        Reference      lcl||EcE24377A_B0003||563   200349 str1ptomyci0n resis9t.ae pargorm,eSntrtB

antibiotics.fa   454 Junior (1)       Newbler        lcl||EcE24377A_B0003||563   200349 str1ptomyci0n resis9t.ae pargorm,eSntrtB
antibiotics.fa   454 Junior (1)       MIRA           lcl||EcE24377A_B0003||563   200349 str1ptomyci0n resis9t.ae pargorm,eSntrtB

antibiotics.fa   454 Junior (1+2)     Newbler        lcl||EcE24377A_B0003||563   200349 str1ptomyci0n resis9t.ae pargorm,eSntrtB
antibiotics.fa   454 Junior (1+2)     MIRA           lcl||EcE24377A_B0003||563   200349 str1ptomyci0n resis9t.ae pargorm,eSntrtB
antibiotics.fa   454 Junior (2)       Newbler        lcl||EcE24377A_B0003||563   200349 str1ptomyci0n resis9t.ae pargorm,eSntrtB

antibiotics.fa   454 Junior (2)       MIRA           lcl||EcE24377A_B0003||5630   54349 st38ptomyci2n resis8t.ae pdstgirne,treBnt
antibiotics.fa   C236-11              Reference      lcl||EcE24377A_B0003||563   200349 str1ptomyci0n resis9t.ae pargorm,eSntrtB

antibiotics.fa   Ion Torrent (1)      Newbler        lcl||EcE24377A_B0003||563   200349 str1ptomyci0n resis9t.ae pargorm,eSntrtB
antibiotics.fa   Ion Torrent (1)      MIRA           lcl||EcE24377A_B0003||563   200349 str1ptomyci0n resis9t.ae pargorm,eSntrtB
antibiotics.fa   Ion Torrent (1+2)    Newbler        lcl||EcE24377A_B0003||563   200349 str1ptomyci0n resis9t.ae pargorm,eSntrtB

antibiotics.fa   Ion Torrent (1+2)    MIRA           lcl||EcE24377A_B0003||563   200349 str1ptomyci0n resis9t.ae pargorm,eSntrtB
antibiotics.fa   Ion Torrent (2)      Newbler        lcl||EcE24377A_B0003||563   200349 str1ptomyci0n resis9t.ae pargorm,eSntrtB

antibiotics.fa   Ion Torrent (2)      MIRA           lcl||EcE24377A_B0003||563   200349 str1ptomyci0n resis9t.ae pargorm,eSntrtB
antibiotics.fa   MiSeq (contigs)      MIRA           lcl||EcE24377A_B0003||563   200349 str1ptomyci0n resis9t.ae pargorm,eSntrtB
antibiotics.fa   MiSeq (contigs)      Velvet         lcl||EcE24377A_B0003||563   200349 str1ptomyci0n resis9t.ae pargorm,eSntrtB

antibiotics.fa   MiSeq (contigs)      CLC            lcl||EcE24377A_B0003||563   200349 str1ptomyci0n resis9t.ae pargorm,eSntrtB
antibiotics.fa   MiSeq (scaffolds)    Velvet         lcl||EcE24377A_B0003||563   200349 str1ptomyci0n resis9t.ae pargorm,eSntrtB
antibiotics.fa MiSeq (scaffolds)  CLC           lcl||EcE24377A_B0003||563200349 st1ptomyci0n reis9t.e pargom,eSntrtB
microcins.fa   280 Reference      Reference     microcin H47 secretion pron33i8   0       0   100.00% agreement
microcins.fa   454 Junior (1)     Newbler       microcin H47 secretion pron62i0   0       0    53.79% disagreement

microcins.fa   454 Junior (1)     MIRA          microcin H47 secretion pron33i8   0       0   100.00% agreement
microcins.fa   454 Junior (1+2)   Newbler       microcin H47 secretion pron12i9   0       0    75.98% disagreement

microcins.fa   454 Junior (1+2)   MIRA          microcin H47 secretion pron33i8   0       0   100.00% agreement
microcins.fa   454 Junior (2)     Newbler       microcin H47 secretion pron12i9   0       0    75.98% disagreement
microcins.fa   454 Junior (2)     MIRA          microcin H47 secretion pron72i7 221      62    14.62% disagreement

microcins.fa   C236-11            Reference     microcin H47 secretion pron33i8   0       0   100.00% agreement
microcins.fa   Ion Torrent (1)    Newbler       microcin H47 secretion pron62i5  11       0    63.97% disagreement

microcins.fa   Ion Torrent (1)    MIRA          microcin H47 secretion pron33i8   0       0   100.00% agreement
microcins.fa   Ion Torrent (1+2)  Newbler       microcin H47 secretion pron33i8   0       0   100.00% agreement
microcins.fa   Ion Torrent (1+2)  MIRA          microcin H47 secretion pron33i8   0       0   100.00% agreement

microcins.fa   Ion Torrent (2)    Newbler       microcin H47 secretion pron13i5   9       0    89.30% disagreement
microcins.fa   Ion Torrent (2)    MIRA          microcin H47 secretion pron12i9   0       0    75.98% disagreement

microcins.fa   MiSeq (contigs)    MIRA          microcin H47 secretion pron33i8   0       0   100.00% agreement
microcins.fa   MiSeq (contigs)    Velvet        microcin H47 secretion pron33i8   0       0   100.00% agreement
microcins.fa   MiSeq (contigs)    CLC           microcin H47 secretion pron33i8   0       0   100.00% agreement

microcins.fa   MiSeq (scaffolds)  Velvet        microcin H47 secretion pron33i8   0       0   100.00% agreement
microcins.fa   MiSeq (scaffolds)  CLC           microcin H47 secretion pron33i8   0       0   100.00% agreement

adhesins.fa    280 Reference      Reference     AggA                     167      0       0   100.00% agreement
adhesins.fa    454 Junior (1)     Newbler       AggA                     105      0       0    62.87% disagreement
adhesins.fa    454 Junior (1)     MIRA          AggA                      35     26       0     5.39% disagreement

adhesins.fa    454 Junior (1+2)   Newbler       AggA                     167      0       0   100.00% agreement
adhesins.fa    454 Junior (1+2)   MIRA          AggA                     167      0       0   100.00% agreement

adhesins.fa    454 Junior (2)     Newbler       AggA                     167      0       0   100.00% agreement
adhesins.fa    454 Junior (2)     MIRA          AggA                     172     27      10    86.83% disagreement
adhesins.fa    C236-11            Reference     AggA                     167      0       0   100.00% agreement

adhesins.fa    Ion Torrent (1)    Newbler       AggA                     167      0       0   100.00% agreement
adhesins.fa    Ion Torrent (1)    MIRA          AggA                     167      0       0   100.00% agreement

adhesins.fa    Ion Torrent (1+2)  Newbler       AggA                     167      0       0   100.00% agreement
adhesins.fa    Ion Torrent (1+2)  MIRA          AggA                     167      0       0   100.00% agreement
adhesins.fa    Ion Torrent (2)    Newbler       AggA                     167      0       0   100.00% agreement

adhesins.fa    Ion Torrent (2)    MIRA          AggA                     167      0       0   100.00% agreement
adhesins.fa    MiSeq (contigs)    MIRA          AggA                     167      0       0   100.00% agreement

adhesins.fa    MiSeq (contigs)    Velvet        AggA                     167      0       0   100.00% agreement
adhesins.fa    MiSeq (contigs)    CLC           AggA                     167      0       0   100.00% agreement
adhesins.fa    MiSeq (scaffolds)  Velvet        AggA                     167      0       0   100.00% agreement

adhesins.fa    MiSeq (scaffolds)  CLC           AggA                     167      0       0   100.00% agreement
adhesins.fa    280 Reference      Reference     AggB                      81      0       0    75.70% agreement
adhesins.fa    454 Junior (1)     Newbler       AggB                     117     11      10    99.07% disagreement

adhesins.fa    454 Junior (1)     MIRA          AggB                      28     18       6     9.35% disagreement
adhesins.fa    454 Junior (1+2)   Newbler       AggB                      81      0       0    75.70% agreement

adhesins.fa    454 Junior (1+2)   MIRA          AggB                     117     11      10    99.07% disagreement
adhesins.fa    454 Junior (2)     Newbler       AggB                      81      0       0    75.70% agreement
adhesins.fa    454 Junior (2)     MIRA          AggB                     117     11      10    99.07% disagreement

adhesins.fa    C236-11            Reference     AggB                      81      0       0    75.70% agreement
adhesins.fa    Ion Torrent (1)    Newbler       AggB                     116      9       9   100.00% disagreement

adhesins.fa    Ion Torrent (1)    MIRA          AggB                     116      9       9   100.00% disagreement
adhesins.fa    Ion Torrent (1+2)  Newbler       AggB                     116      9       9   100.00% disagreement
adhesins.fa    Ion Torrent (1+2)  MIRA          AggB                      81      0       0    75.70% agreement

adhesins.fa    Ion Torrent (2)    Newbler       AggB                     116      9       9   100.00% disagreement
adhesins.fa    Ion Torrent (2)    MIRA          AggB                     116      9       9   100.00% disagreement

adhesins.fa    MiSeq (contigs)    MIRA          AggB                      81      0       0    75.70% agreement
adhesins.fa    MiSeq (contigs)    Velvet        AggB                      81      0       0    75.70% agreement
adhesins.fa    MiSeq (contigs)    CLC           AggB                      81      0       0    75.70% agreement

adhesins.fa    MiSeq (scaffolds)  Velvet        AggB                      81      0       0    75.70% agreement
adhesins.fa    MiSeq (scaffolds)  CLC           AggB                      81      0       0    75.70% agreement

adhesins.fa    280 Reference      Reference     AggC                     860      0       0   100.00% agreement
adhesins.fa    454 Junior (1)     Newbler       AggC                     769      0       0    89.42% disagreement
adhesins.fa    454 Junior (1)     MIRA          AggC                     853    571      48    32.79% disagreement

adhesins.fa    454 Junior (1+2)   Newbler       AggC                     769      0       0    89.42% disagreement
adhesins.fa    454 Junior (1+2)   MIRA          AggC                     471      7       0    53.95% disagreement
adhesins.fa    454 Junior (2)     Newbler      AggC                     772      2       0   89.53% disagreement
adhesins.fa    454 Junior (2)     MIRA         AggC                     738      7       0   85.00% disagreement
adhesins.fa    C236-11            Reference    AggC                     860      0       0  100.00% agreement

adhesins.fa    Ion Torrent (1)    Newbler      AggC                     737      1       0   85.58% disagreement
adhesins.fa    Ion Torrent (1)    MIRA         AggC                     404      0       0   46.98% disagreement

adhesins.fa    Ion Torrent (1+2)  Newbler      AggC                     731      0       0   85.00% disagreement
adhesins.fa    Ion Torrent (1+2)  MIRA         AggC                     769      0       0   89.42% disagreement
adhesins.fa    Ion Torrent (2)    Newbler      AggC                     737      1       0   85.58% disagreement

adhesins.fa    Ion Torrent (2)    MIRA         AggC                     731      0       0   85.00% disagreement
adhesins.fa    MiSeq (contigs)    MIRA         AggC                     860      0       0  100.00% agreement

adhesins.fa    MiSeq (contigs)    Velvet       AggC                     550      0       0   63.95% disagreement
adhesins.fa    MiSeq (contigs)    CLC          AggC                     860      0       0  100.00% agreement
adhesins.fa    MiSeq (scaffolds)  Velvet       AggC                     550      0       0   63.95% disagreement

adhesins.fa    MiSeq (scaffolds)  CLC          AggC                     860      0       0  100.00% agreement
adhesins.fa    280 Reference      Reference    AggD                     254      0       0   39.20% agreement

adhesins.fa    454 Junior (1)     Newbler      AggD                     254      0       0   39.20% agreement
adhesins.fa    454 Junior (1)     MIRA         AggD                     225     17       0   32.10% disagreement
adhesins.fa    454 Junior (1+2)   Newbler      AggD                     254      0       0   39.20% agreement

adhesins.fa    454 Junior (1+2)   MIRA         AggD                     254      0       0   39.20% agreement
adhesins.fa    454 Junior (2)     Newbler      AggD                     241      7       2   36.11% disagreement

adhesins.fa    454 Junior (2)     MIRA         AggD                     254      0       0   39.20% agreement
adhesins.fa    C236-11            Reference    AggD                     254      0       0   39.20% agreement
adhesins.fa    Ion Torrent (1)    Newbler      AggD                     241      7       2   36.11% disagreement

adhesins.fa    Ion Torrent (1)    MIRA         AggD                     141      0       0   21.76% disagreement
adhesins.fa    Ion Torrent (1+2)  Newbler      AggD                     241      7       2   36.11% disagreement

adhesins.fa    Ion Torrent (1+2)  MIRA         AggD                     141      0       0   21.76% disagreement
adhesins.fa    Ion Torrent (2)    Newbler      AggD                     241      7       2   36.11% disagreement
adhesins.fa    Ion Torrent (2)    MIRA         AggD                     101      7       2   14.51% disagreement

adhesins.fa    MiSeq (contigs)    MIRA         AggD                     254      0       0   39.20% agreement
adhesins.fa    MiSeq (contigs)    Velvet       AggD                     231      0       0   35.65% disagreement

adhesins.fa    MiSeq (contigs)    CLC          AggD                     254      0       0   39.20% agreement
adhesins.fa    MiSeq (scaffolds)  Velvet       AggD                     231      0       0   35.65% disagreement
adhesins.fa    MiSeq (scaffolds)  CLC          AggD                     254      0       0   39.20% agreement
Chapter 6



Statement of contribution to


work



6.1   Paper I

NJL helped plan the sequencing runs. NJL designed and performed the bioinfor-
matics analysis (assembly, alignment, SNP calling) and helped draft the manuscript.



6.2   Paper II

NJL performed the bioinformatics analysis (assembly, alignment, SNP calling,
comparison of strains). NJL designed validation primers for PCR. NJL wrote the
manuscript with MH.


6.3   Paper III

NJL initiated the crowd-sourcing analysis, performed the Ion Torrent and Illu-
mina assemblies and deposited the sequences in Genbank, performed phylogenetic
and comparative analysis of the outbreak strain including recapitulating existing

crowd-sourcing results, generated the circular comparison ▯gure and wrote the
supplementary materials.





                           154
                                                        PAPER IV



6.4    Paper IV

NJL helped conceive the projectNJL designed the bioinformatics analysis

and performed sequence read mapping, de novo assembly, assembly comparison,
pathogen biology comparison, wrote the analysis scripts and created the Github
repository. NJL write the results and methods section of the manuscript and

prepared all ▯gures, tables and supplementary materials.












































                                155