MacLean et al. GigaScience 2013, 2:2

http://www.gigasciencejournal.com/content/2/1/2




 COMMENTARY                                                                                      Open Access



Crowdsourcing genomic analyses of ash and ash


dieback– power to the people

              1*                 1               2                3                 3            3
Dan MacLean , Kentaro Yoshida, Anne Edwards, Lisa Crossman, Bernardo Clavijo, Matt Clark,
David Swarbreck  3, Matthew Bashton, Patrick Chapman, Mark Gijzen, Mario Caccamo, Allan Downie,        2
                 1                         1
Sophien Kamoun and Diane GO Saunders



  Abstract

  Ash dieback is a devastating fungal disease of ash trees that has swept across Europe and recently reached the UK.

  This emergent pathogen has received little study in the past and its effect threatens to overwhelm the ash
  population. In response to this we have produced some initial genomics datasets and taken the unusual step of
  releasing them to the scientific community for analysis without first performing our own. In this manner we hope
  to ‘crowdsource’ analyses and bring the expertise of the community to bear on this problem as quickly as possible.

  Our data has been released through our website at oadb.tsl.ac.uk and a public GitHub repository.

  Keywords: Crowdsource, Genomics, Ash dieback, Open source, Altmetrics


Main text                                                   threatening diseases and with this initiative we aim to
oadb.tsl.ac.uk: A new resource for the crowdsourcing of     make it possible for experts from around the world to

genomic analyses on ash and ash dieback                     access the data and analyse it immediately, speeding up
Ash dieback is a devastating disease of ash trees caused    the process of discovery. We hope that by providing data
by the aggressive fungal pathogen Chalara fraxinea.         as soon as possible we will stimulate crowdsourcing and

This fungus emerged in the early 1990s in Poland and        open community engagement to tackle this devastating
has since spread west across Europe reaching native for-    pathogen.
ests in the UK late last year. The emergence of Chalara
in the UK caused public outcry where up to 90% of the
                                                            The transcriptomics and genomics data we have released
more than 80 million ash trees are thought to be under      so far
threat. The disease, which is a newcomer to Britain, was
first reported in the natural environment in October        We have generated and released Illumina sequence data
                                                            of both the transcriptome and genome of Chalara and
2012 and has since been recorded in native woodland         the transcriptome of infected and uninfected ash trees.
throughout the UK. There is no known treatment for
ash dieback, current control measures include burning       We took the unusual first step of directly sequencing the
                                                            “interaction transcriptome” [2] of a lesion dissected from
infected trees to try and prevent spread [1] and the        an infected ash twig collected in the field. This enabled
implications for the UK environment and the economy
remain stark.                                               us to respond quickly, generating useful information
                                                            without time-consuming standard laboratory culturing;
  To kick start genomic analyses of the pathogen and        the shortest route from the wood to the sequencer to
host, we took the unconventional step of rapidly gener-     the computer.
ating and releasing genomic sequence data. We released
                                                              The Chalara transcriptome data, generated at The
the data through our new ash and ash dieback website,       Sainsbury Laboratory (TSL, Norwich, UK) was derived
oadb.tsl.ac.uk, which we launched in December 2012.         from two infected ash samples collected at Ash-
Speed is essential in responses to rapidly appearing and
                                                            wellthorpe Lower Wood, near Norwich; the location of
                                                            the first confirmed case of ash dieback in the wild in the
1 Correspondence: dan.maclean@sainsbury-laboratory.ac.uk    UK. Here we extracted RNA from branches of two
 The Sainsbury Laboratory, Norwich Research Park, Norwich NR4 7UH, UK
Full list of author information is available at the end of the articlesh trees, prepared cDNA libraries from each

                              Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, andive
                              reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
MacLean et al. GigaScience 2013, 2:2                                                                          Page 2 of 3
http://www.gigasciencejournal.com/content/2/1/2




and sequenced these to create 76 nt paired-end reads on      ash dieback and that concerted, early data-sharing and
our Illumina GAII.                                           open analysis is a crucial step in a productive and timely

  In parallel to the transcriptome data, genome sequence     response to emergent pathogen threats.
data were produced in a coordinated effort between The
John Innes Centre (JIC), TSL and The Genome Analysis
                                                             The future of our data and our initiative
Centre (TGAC) in Norwich. A single C. fraxinea isolate       To date, genome analysis of emerging plant pathogens is
was cultured from infected tissue found in Kenninghall
Wood. Genomic DNA libraries were constructed and             not rapidly implemented as is routinely done with
                                                             human pathogens [5,6]. Worse, the data (when available)
sequenced on an Illumina MiSeq sequencer as 150 nt           is not immediately released into the public domain. We
and 250 nt paired-end libraries.
  As soon as these datasets were generated we released       hope our openness will encourage the scientific commu-
                                                             nity to engage in this proactive and collaborative model
them through oadb.tsl.ac.uk. We took the unusual step        of working when faced with pressing challenges. Already
to release the data before preliminary analysis had been
undertaken so that we might take advantage of the huge       we are seeing a significant amount of work being pro-
                                                             vided by external groups. Contributions of transcriptome
range of expertise and knowledge available outside our       assemblies, protein domain annotations, phylogenetic
groups, and thereby make the best of the data as quickly
as possible via a crowdsourcing approach.                    trees and BLASTs for specific gene family members have
                                                             been provided from groups across the world.

Crowdsourcing: bringing the power of many, marshalling
expertise and democratising genomics                         Credit where credit is due

Crowdsourcing is a form of massively parallel collabor-      We absolutely understand the need for scientists to be
ation, the main distinguishing feature of which is the       credited for what they do and we intend to make sure
low overhead to entry of participation and low level of      that everyone who contributes receives full attribution.

investment from a participant. The power is in the sheer     The GitHub repository ensures this, and we are commit-
number of people interested in seeing the goals of the       ted to the principle for all other potential results from
project achieved. Scientists have not been slow to adopt     this initiative. The altmetrics movement is making it

these models to carry out work that could not be auto-       possible and acceptable for scientists to cite the varied
mated successfully and require human intelligence and        products of science [7], rather than simply the papers

expertise. Recently genomic scientists have made inroads     they write and we intend to make it as easy as possible
to leveraging the power of crowds to annotate and as-        for contributors to be able to cite what they did via com-
semble the genome sequence of a novel strain of Escher-      mit number and potentially DOIs.

ichia coli O104:H4 bacteria that caused a serious
outbreak of foodborne illness in northern Germany in
spring 2011. These scientists were able to quickly link      Towards a rapid response for food and ecosystem
                                                             security
up with others across the world with similar skills to       A pathogenic threat to our forests and ecosystems is a
rapidly analyse the novel pathogenic strain [3]. Most im-
portantly, crowdsourcing allows for a new form of po-        threat to our ability to live on the planet sustainably, just
                                                             as a threat to our crops is a threat to our ability to feed
tentially effective live peer-review, many sets of eyes      ourselves. In these situations it is vital to respond as
interrogating and reviewing data and analyses mean that
unusual results are quickly highlighted and can be           quickly as possible so we must embrace the evolution of
                                                             a new digital immune system [8]. Our initiative is an
assessed and dealt with appropriately. Whether they are      early step towards developing the crucial function of the
eventually found to be inconsistencies in analysis or
more exciting genuine new discoveries, the end product       digital immune system for response to plant pathogens;
                                                             the thing we cannot upload to a repository is the people
is brought to the scientific community many times faster     with the expertise and the will to contribute, and that is
than the usual peer-review by a small number of
reviewers and crucially it all happens out in the open       why we need the scientific community to download our
                                                             data and provide analyses.
with maximum transparency. The cornerstone of our              Our website and repository can be found at:
crowdsourcing is our repository on GitHub [4], a ver-
sioning system designed for collaboration in software de-
                                                               http://oadb.tsl.ac.uk
velopment that automatically maintains attribution of          https://github.com/ash-dieback-crowdsource/data
contribution, meaning that whoever contributes will get
full credit for the difference that they made.
                                                             Abbreviations
  We are certain that the data will prove useful to any-     DOI: Digital Object Identifier; JIC: The John Innes Centre; Nt: Nucleotide;
one who wishes to be involved in the fightback against       TGAC: The Genome Analysis Centre; TSL: The Sainsbury Laboratory.
MacLean et al. GigaScience 2013, 2:2                                                                                                                  Page 3 of 3
http://www.gigasciencejournal.com/content/2/1/2






Competing interests

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors’ contributions

All authors contributed to the drafting of the manuscript. DM created the
oadb website, designed and instantiated the GitHub repository and wrote
the commentary, AE and AD sourced biological materials for sequencing,

DGOS, KY and SK prepared biological materials, managed sequencing and
performed analyses and contributed data to the repository. LC, BC, DS, M
Clarke, PC and MG and MC provided analyses of data in the repository. All

authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank The Gatsby Charitable Foundation, and the
Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council for financial support.

Author details
1
 The Sainsbury Laboratory, Norwich Research Park, Norwich NR4 7UH, UK.
2The John Innes Centre, Norwich Research Park, Norwich NR4 7UH, UK. The  3
Genome Analysis Centre, Norwich Research Park, Norwich NR4 7UH, UK.
4
 Bioinformatics Support Unit, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Framlington Place,
Newcastle University, Newcastle NE2 4HH, UK.    5Agriculture and Agri-food
Canada, 1391 Sandford St, London, ON N5V 4T3, Canada.


Received: 5 February 2013 Accepted: 7 February 2013
Published: 12 February 2013


References
1.   Forestry commission Great Britain, Chalara dieback of a.shhttp://www.

     forestry.gov.uk/chalara.
2.   Birch PRJ, Kamoun SS : tudying interaction transcriptomes: coordinated
     analyses of gene expression during plant-microorganism interactio     .Ins

     New Technologies for Life Sciences: A Trends Gui.eew York: Elsevier
     Science; 2000:77–82.
3.   GitHub crowdsource BGI dat.ahttps://github.com/ehec-outbreak-

     crowdsourced/BGI-data-analysis/wiki.
4.   GitHub ash dieback crowdsource dat.ahttps://github.com/ash-dieback-
     crowdsource/data.

5.   Green S, Studholme DJ, Laue BE, Dorati F, Lovell H, Arnold D, Cottrell JE,
     Bridgett S, Blaxter M, Huitema E, Thwaites R, Sharp PM, Jackson RW,
     Kamoun S:Comparative genome analysis provides insights into the

     evolution and adaptation of Pseudomonas syringae pv. aesculi on
     Aesculus hippocastanumP    . LoS One2010,5:e10224.
6.   Kamoun S:Genomics of emerging plant pathogens: too little, too late.

     Microbiol Today2012,39:140.
7.   Piwowar H:Altmetrics: Value all research productsN.ature2013,493:159.
8.   Schatz MC, Phillippy AMT:he rise of a digital immune systemG.igaScience

     2012,1:4.

  doi:10.1186/2047-217X-2-2

  Cite this article as: MacLean et al.: Crowdsourcing genomic analyses of
  ash and ash dieback – power to the people. GigaScience 2013 2:2.






                                                                                          Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
                                                                                          and take full advantage of:


                                                                                          • Convenient online submission

                                                                                          • Thorough peer review

                                                                                          • No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges

                                                                                          • Immediate publication on acceptance

                                                                                          • Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
                                                                                          • Research which is freely available for redistribution



                                                                                          Submit your manuscript at
                                                                                          www.biomedcentral.com/submit