Crowdsourcing Malaria Parasite Quantification: An Online Game for
Analyzing Images of Infected Thick Blood Smears

Monitoring Editor: Gunther Eysenbach
Reviewed by Martin Grobusch

Miguel Angel Luengo-Oroz, PhD,  12Asier Arranz, MEng, and John Frean, MBBCh, MMed   4,5


Author information ► Article notes ► Copyright and License information ►

This article has been cited by other articles in PMC.


Abstract
                                                                                                Go to:


Introduction

Crowdsourcing methodologies leveraging the contributions of citizen scientists connected via the
Internet have recently proved to be of great value to solve certain scientific challenges involving

“big data” analysis that cannot be entirely automated [1]. In the GalaxyZoo project, citizen
scientists classified imagery of hundreds of thousands of galaxies drawn from the Sloan Digital

Sky Survey and the Hubble Space Telescope archive [2]. Crowdsourced contributions can be
achieved with different motivation strategies, such as micropayments or games. The “serious

games” concept refers to an intention not only to entertain users, but also to train or educate them
[3]. The “gamification” [4] of the crowdsourcing approach enables a higher motivation of the

participants and, using the Internet as a vehicle, untaps an underexploited resource for scientific
research [5,6]: it is estimated that 3 billion hours per week are spent playing computer and

videogames worldwide [7]. For instance, Fold-It, an online game where players solve 3-
dimensional puzzles by folding protein structures, has resulted in several breakthrough scientific

discoveries [8-10]. Another recent growing trend is the use of crowdsourcing techniques for
participatory health research studies in which individuals report in real time a variety of health

conditions [11], providing a promising complement to traditional clinical trials. Considering
crowdsourced image analysis, collective processing has been recently explored for earthquake

damage assessment from remote sensing imagery [12]. However, this methodology has not yet
been mainstreamed for biomedical image analysis.


In this context, analysis of microscopic images of malaria-infected blood samples is an appealing
goal. Worldwide, there are more than 200 million malaria cases and approximately 800,000

deaths annually, mainly in children [13,14]. Careful optical microscopic examination of a well-
stained blood film remains the gold standard for malaria diagnosis [15]. Confirmation of a

negative diagnosis is ultimately dependent on the technician’s expertise and can take up to 20
minutes. In addition, as malaria prevalence decreases in one specific place over time, microscopy
technician skills may now be needed in other regions. Fast, cheap, ubiquitous, and accurate

diagnosis is a priority in the Agenda for Malaria Eradication [16]. Although automated
processing methodologies have been used extensively for the analysis of digitized blood smears
[17,18], currently there are no completely automated image processing systems that can achieve

perfect parasite recognition [19-24]. The main problem in computer-aided malaria diagnosis is
that algorithms are usually not very robust with respect to the variable appearance of the
parasites and changing image acquisition conditions.

The goal of this research was to test the feasibility of a crowdcomputing approach for malaria

parasite quantification in which nonexperts count parasites in digitized thick blood smears
through an online game (crowdsourcing) and a decision algorithm combines the data generated

by several players in order to achieve a collective detection with a higher accuracy rate than an
individual analysis. This idea—gaming for distributed malaria image analysis—has been also
explored in a recent study by Mavandadi et al [25], in parallel to and independently of this study.

These researchers designed a video game and a processing pipeline to investigate whether
nonexperts can assess if a single-cell image extracted from a digitized thin blood sample is
infected with malaria or not. Although this study and the present research share a similar vision

and goal, the research questions posed and solutions adopted differ substantially in terms of the
data analyzed, the nature of the participants, the main task required of them, and the processing

methodologies.

The proposed system in this study provides a new tool for parasite counting, but not malaria
diagnosis, which is a more complex problem [26]. For this purpose, the microscopist protocol
will need to be translated completely into a gaming protocol, including assessing the presence or

absence of parasites, the parasite species, and growth stages and prognostic markers, such as
schizonts or gametocytes, or pigment load. In the long run, crowdsourced remote telediagnosis

from images acquired with optical microscopy and distributed worldwide through the Internet
and possibly with systems that integrate the microscope into mobile phones [27,28], might have
a potential impact for malaria-endemic countries because diagnosis availability and its cost could

be optimized. However, in addition to the need for conventional laboratory processing and
imaging equipment to prepare the material to a sufficiently high standard, this kind of analysis
will require a communications infrastructure with enough bandwidth to distribute the images

over the Internet and a critical number of online participants in order to ensure timely analysis of
the images.

This work presents a proof-of-concept system that explores the feasibility of an online game-

based, crowdsourced solution for malaria parasite quantitation in digitized images of thick blood
smears.

                                                                                              Go to:
Methods

We selected an image database of malaria-positive blood films that had been previously analyzed
by experts to generate gold standards. These images were then incorporated into an online game.

The player’s task was to click on the parasites. When a player found all the parasites present in 1
image (constituting a level) within a limited amount of time, the game continued by presenting a

new image. Otherwise, the game was over. All the players’ clicks were registered in a database.
After 1 month, all the collected data was preprocessed in order to group all the clicks that players
placed around the different objects in the image: parasites, white blood cells (leukocytes), and

background noise. Finally, an algorithm that combined the different games to increase accuracy
was developed and evaluated.

Ethics Statement

The malaria images used in this research were previously used to evaluate automated image

analysis methods [20]. Original blood samples and resultant test images were collected and used
with ethical approval from the Human Research Ethics Committee (Medical), University of the

Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa (protocol number M051126). No new ethical review
board approval was required since the digital images used in our work were not linked to any
patient data or diagnosis and were digitally shared for microscopic training evaluation purposes.

The data analyzed in this research were anonymously produced by online volunteers who agreed
to play an Internet game. The participants were informed of the research purposes of the game on
the game webpage.


Image Database

The image database was compiled from 28 Giemsa-stained thick films made from blood infected
with malaria (Plasmodium falciparum) parasites, acquired using a 50× objective in a

conventional laboratory optical microscope. Medium to low parasitemia images were selected
for the game because of its design (1-minute games) and the fact that discrepancies between
automatic counting methodologies and manual expert counting tend to be greater in low

parasitemia cases. A gold standard mask image was generated for each of the 28 images to
evaluate player performance.

Game Architecture

The objective of the MalariaSpot game was to tag as many parasites as possible in an image in 1

minute. The instructions—what is a parasite and what it is not—were briefly explained in the
splash screen of the game website (Figure 1a). During the game, if the player found all the
parasites in 1 image in the allowed time, a new image was presented (Figure 1b). Therefore, a

player could analyze several images (levels) in a single game. In order to reinforce the game’s
addictive nature, the players were given continuous feedback: each click was compared with the
gold standard and an icon was placed immediately at the tag position to indicate a correct or
incorrect selection. In addition, if the player misidentified an object and clicked in a wrong

location (eg, on a leukocyte), the player was penalized by reducing the remaining time available
to solve the level. Players were confronted with different, randomly selected test images. The

difficulty of the levels increased as the time penalty for wrong tags grew with each level. As a
motivation strategy, at the end of the game players were invited to register and provide their

name, email address, and country in order to be included in the table of high scorers depicting

the top daily, weekly, and monthly players.







Figure 1

MalariaSpot example screens and player distribution. (a) Splash screen of MalariaSpot game
website showing the game instructions. (b) Example of MalariaSpot game screen. (c) Map

showing the geographic distribution of players during the evaluation period ...

Data Collection


The MalariaSpot game webpage was launched on April 25, 2012 (World Malaria Day). During
the following month, more than 6000 players from 95 different countries (Figure 1c) visited the

game webpage according to the number of Internet Protocol (IP) addresses reported by Google
Analytics, although the actual number of players was probably larger because those connecting

from big institutions, such as universities, share the same IP address and other players may have
blocked the Google Analytics script. Online volunteers played a total of 12,105 games that

resulted in the analyses of 20,049 images and generated a database of 270,207 tags. Social media
was the main traffic source; approximately 30% of the players originated from a Facebook link

and 30% came from a Twitter reference. Most of the remaining visits were through links in
digital newspapers and blogs, especially from Spanish-speaking countries.


Data Preprocessing

All the players’ clicks were saved into a database containing the user identification number,

image identification number, x-position and y-position on the game screen, time of the click
(from the start of the level), and whether the click was on a true parasite or not (see Figures 2a-d

and Multimedia Appendix 1). In a preprocessing step, we generated a binary matrix, I (g,p), for   n
each test image n, where each row g contains a different game and each column p corresponds to

a parasite. A value of 1 at a certain position, I (gnp)i=j1, means that the parasite with index j has
been clicked in the game i. Otherwise, I (g,pn =i0.jThe number of rows is the number of games

that have been played at each test image n. The number of columns corresponds to the number of
parasites for a given level in the gold standard plus the number of phantom parasites. We defined

a phantom parasite as an object in the image that is not a parasite and that has been tagged by ≥ 1
players. The phantom parasites were defined in order to group together all the clicks that were
around the same position, but not on the identical pixel (eg, all the clicks that were inside a

leukocyte were considered to be pointing at the same phantom parasite). An image processing
pipeline that grouped together clicks that were at a distance of less than the typical parasite size
was implemented in order to generate all the connected components in each image that

corresponded to phantom parasites (Figure 2c). Therefore, the output of this preprocessing stage
consisted of 1 binary matrix per test image that characterized the performance of all the games

played for each image. Additionally, filtered versions of these matrices were created by selecting
only the data from games in which at least 1 level was completed, 2 levels were completed, and
so on.






Figure 2

Crowdsourced image analysis of thick blood film infected with malaria. (a) Test image analyzed
in the game. (b) Gold standard image in which each label corresponds to a parasite. (c)
Aggregation of gamer’s clicks where green regions correspond ...


Collective Parasite Detection: Quorum Algorithm

A critical aim of this research was to show how individual nonexpert analysis can be combined
to achieve higher accuracy rates. In order to combine the games of several players and produce a

single “detection,” we implemented a quorum algorithm. The output of the quorum collective
detection features all the image objects (both true parasites and phantom parasites) in one image
that have been tagged in at least X individual games out of a larger group of Y games (Figure 3).

The idea is simple: an object is considered in the collective detection if it has been tagged
(“voted”) in at least X out of Y (X ≤ Y) games. Typically, when the quorum value increases,
there are fewer true positives and false negatives. In order to evaluate the performance of

different group sizes and quorum values, we randomly selected 1000 subsets of games per (X,Y)
couple with a maximum group size of Y = 30 games. For each individual subset of Y random

games in 1 image, the collective detection performance was measured for all quorum values of
X ≤ Y. Performance evaluation was also measured taking the subset of games that passed at least
level 1, level 2, level 3, and level 4.
Figure 3

Illustrative example of the quorum algorithm. Parasite detection results on test image obtained
from the combination of 4 games processed with different quorum values.

                                                                                             Go to:

Results

Out of a total of 270,207 clicks, 78.65% tagged a true parasite. Analysis of the levels reached by

the players reveals that approximately one-third of the players were able to find all the parasites
in an image, independent of the level (see Figure 4d). Additionally, once players successfully
completed level 5, they became game experts and no longer followed the 1 in 3 chance of

passing to the next level—they could complete as many as 22 levels (achieved by the best player
so far). Interestingly, the overall number of clicks on each of the parasites in 1 image was

similar, meaning that although 2 of 3 players usually did not complete the level, all the parasites
were equally difficult to identify (Figures 4a and b). This fact was corroborated in a special case
for image ID6, where the probability of tagging one particular phantom parasite was as high as

the typical probability for a true parasite. A further look into the gold standard revealed that, in
fact, this phantom parasite was a true parasite that was not included in the gold standard by
mistake (Figure 4c).










Figure 4
Individual gamer’s performance. (a) Tagging probability for true parasites and phantom parasites
on image ID1 based on all games. (b) Tagging probability field superimposed on raw image.

True parasites (gold standard) are signaled by white squares. ...

We performed an exhaustive evaluation of the collective gamers performance using the quorum
algorithm evaluated 1000 times for all group sizes ranging from 1 to 30 games over each of the

test images under the different training conditions (completing 1 level can be considered as a 1-
minute training) (Figure 5a). Results show a monotone smooth behavior for the true positive
(TP) and false positive (FP) rates depending on the group size and quorum value: the bigger the

group size or the smaller the quorum required, the more true parasites were tagged and the higher
the TP rate, but also more phantom parasites were collectively tagged, increasing the FP rate

(Figure 5b). Analysis of the discrimination index (DI) function (DI = TP – FP) revealed that
there was an optimal quorum number that maximized the DI for each group size (Figure 5c). For

instance, the optimal quorum value was 3 for a group size of 7 games (randomly chosen among
all games) achieving a DI = 90%, whereas the optimal quorum for a group of 10 games was 4,
providing a mean DI = 95%. When comparing the performance of the collective analysis based

on the training time (levels completed), we observed a clear dependence between training and DI
(Figure 5d). The number of games needed to be combined in order to achieve a DI = 99% was

22, 13, 10, 9, and 4, respectively, for the subset of games that successfully completed 0, 1, 2, 3,
and 4 game levels.










Figure 5
Collective parasite detection. (a) Accuracy results in 1000 random groups run over image ID1
with a group of 10 and 15 games and a quorum of 3 and 6 votes. (b) Mean results of true

positives (TP), false positives (FP), and TP – FP for 1000 experiments      ...

The maximum DI for each group size (obtained with its optimal quorum value) at all training
levels was fitted to a model equation DI = f(group size, training time) using the scientific data

mining software Eureqa [29]. A multivariate optimization process was used to find the following
collective detection equation:

DI(group,training) = 1 - e  –(alpha + beta group + gamma group training)

where group size ranged from 1 to 30 games and the coefficient of determination (R ) goodness

of fit with (alpha = 0.69, beta = 0.24, and gamma = 0.13) is greater than 0.97 for each training
value {0,1,2,3,4} levels (or minutes) (Figure 6). This equation highlights the product

group⋅training, meaning that the accuracy increase provided by adding 1 game to the group size
can almost be compensated (the term beta⋅group varies when increasing the group size) by 1

minute training or vice versa.






Figure 6
Model of the collective detection of malaria parasites. Curve fitting of the mean accuracy rate for

all group sizes and training levels.

We also evaluated the collective performance detection against the automated image recognition
methodology presented by Frean [20]. For each image, we calculated the minimum number of
gamers needed to perform as well as the automatic system and we found that it was required to

combine 7.2, 4.6, 3.9, 3.0, and 2.3 games, respectively, from the subset of players that
successfully completed 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4 game levels (see Multimedia Appendix 2).

                                                                                            Go to:

Discussion


In this study, a crowdcomputing image analysis system was developed that identifies malaria
parasites in digitized images of thick blood smears using an online game played by nonexpert
volunteers. Results for the images analyzed showed that the performance of the quorum

algorithm that combines the games from different players can be as high as both human expert
counting and automated processing methodologies. Indeed, the results showed that, on average,
the combination of 22 games or more, regardless of the players’ experience, was enough to

obtain almost perfect parasite counting (99%) in the tested images. This performance could also
be obtained by combining 13 games from players trained for 1 minute. However, no conclusions

could be drawn about detecting extremely low parasitemias (as low as 1 parasite per 30 or more
images).

Feedback from several players stressed the need for clearer game instructions. Although our
strategy was learning by doing, commenters suggested that an explanation screen and/or an

initial training level would lead to better results, at least for those players who did not complete
the first level. The collective detection equation allowed us to model the system performance in
terms of the number of games and the training of the players. An important question arising from

this model is whether any crowdsourced image analysis system that roughly consists of detecting
spots in images will have a similar behavior. In the affirmative case, the model could be used in

the future to design and evaluate new crowdsourced biomedical image analysis applications.

The overall results endorse the online gaming approach to the task of counting malaria parasites
in thick blood films using a crowdsourcing methodology, validated “in the wild” by thousands of
anonymous online players. This conclusion extends the findings of Mavandadi et al [25], but

from a different perspective. The methodology of the present research involves finding parasites
in images from thick blood samples whereas in the study by Mavandadi et al the main task was

to make binary decisions (infected versus uninfected) of single-cell images extracted from thin
blood samples [25]. Both thin and thick blood films are used in malaria microscopy [26]. The
thick film, consisting of many layers of red and white blood cells, is used to search for malaria

parasites and to count them as an indicator of the severity of the disease. The thin film, a single
layer of red and white blood cells, is mainly used to confirm the malaria parasite species and

sometimes to enumerate parasites and evaluate other prognostic features. In addition to the type
of data analyzed (thin versus thick blood film) and the task required of the participants (binary
decisions in single-cell images versus parasite detection and location), the nature and number of

participants varies, from 31 controlled volunteers [25] versus > 6000 anonymous online
contributors in the current research. The studies can be considered complementary and directed
toward the same goal; the different methodologies and experiments lead to the global conclusion

that nonexperts are able to rapidly learn and identify the typical features of malaria parasites in
digitized thin and thick blood films, and that the combination of the analyses of several users can

provide similar accuracy rates for parasite quantification as expert microscopists.

Future developments of the current research should include the exploration of new algorithms
that combine the games of several players in a more complex way than the quorum algorithm.
For instance, if players’ identities are logged and tracked, it would be possible to adapt

algorithms to differentially weight the analysis of players depending on their profile, experience,
past performance, or gaming strategies [30-33]. Automated processing methodologies report
accuracy rates that are high, but still not as good as human visual inspection; therefore, we

expect that combined man-machine diagnosis systems will be the most effective strategy. Note
that, for instance, in the present study the players’ detection performance was similar for all the

images, whereas the automated detection algorithm [20] had heterogeneous performances for
different images. Therefore, in hybrid systems, humans could be used first to train the
recognition algorithm and later to analyze the more complex cases (supplementing the automatic

processing methodologies), whereas the easy cases would be automatically processed.

In summary, this proof-of-concept research has shown that malaria image analysis for parasite
quantification, obtained by combining the detection of several online nonexperts with minimal

training, can be as good as the results provided by an expert microscopist. Although the game
score is generated by comparing the user tags with previously analyzed images, in future, the
observation protocol from expert microscopists could theoretically be translated into a game and

images that have not yet been assessed by professionals could be introduced into that game. This
raises the possibility of establishing a global specialized task force of remote gamers-workers
able to perform online malaria parasite detection and quantitation. The validity of this approach

for malaria diagnosis is still unclear and will depend on the method’s speed, efficiency,
robustness, cost, and above all, accuracy. Constraints related to production of the high-quality

images required for malaria species identification will have to be addressed. Specifically, the
performance should be compared to current diagnostic tools and trends, such as rapid
immunochromatographic diagnostic tests that offer a cost-efficient solution. However, rapid tests

have limitations, such as restricted malaria species recognition and an inability to quantitate
parasite load and monitor parasitological response to treatment. In general, we suggest that the
methodology presented in this research could be applied to other biomedical image analysis tasks
with potential impact on global health challenges, such as enumeration of acid-fast bacilli in

sputum smears for tuberculosis diagnosis. An inherent benefit from this distributed telediagnosis
system is that it is scalable and resilient. Among other positive externalities of this research,
there is a clear educational impact because more than 6000 players have learned how malaria

parasites appear in thick blood films. In addition, as we allowed players to introduce their
nicknames into the table of high scorers, we could identify approximately 100 players who now
can be considered as experts in parasite counting, within the system’s limitations. Citizen science

projects of this kind could impact future educational paradigms: they are a clear opportunity for
engaging with young people and offer a hands-on experience that could be used in online

learning platforms [34,35].

Concerning the evolution of the MalariaSpot platform, next steps might explore the feasibility of
developing a new game version that mimics, if possible, all the relevant steps of the microscopist
protocol in real-life conditions (eg, decisions about presence or absence of malaria parasites,

parasite stages and species, and quantitation), but this is a much more complex and challenging
process. Assuming image quality concerns can be addressed, this system could potentially be
completed by integrating the online platform for rapid diagnosis with the recently developed

cellphone-microscope systems [36] that allow data transfer directly from field workers and
health centers, distributing the data worldwide through the Internet.

                                                                                           Go to:


Acknowledgments

This research was partially funded by the Picata program from the Moncloa Campus of
International Excellence, Universidad Politécnica de Madrid and Universidad Complutense de
Madrid, Spain; and the project TEC2010-21619-C04-03 from the Spanish Ministry of Science

and Innovation.

The authors would like to thank Enrique Mendoza for setting up the Web database and Jacobo
Gomez for the Web illustrations. Thanks for the support in the launch of the game to Anoush

Tatevossian, Natalia Rodriguez, Maria Fernandez, Maria Luengo-Oroz, Antonio Blanco, Jose L
Rubio-Guivernau, Nati Luengo-Oroz, and Cesar Martin. Thanks for comments and feedback on
the manuscript to Carlos Castro-Gonzalez, David Pastor-Escuredo, Gert Wollny, Juan Ortuño,

Pedro Guerra, Patricia Arroba, Thierry Savy, Ana Tajadura-Jimenez, Maria J Ledesma-Carbayo,
Andres Santos, and Jonathan Platkiewicz.

Last, but not least, thanks to the more than 6000 anonymous participants who played the

MalariaSpot game.