Response


Crowdsourcing Public Health

Experiments: A Response to Jonathan

Darrow’s Crowdsourcing Clinical Trials

                          †                                    ††
Ameet Sarpatwari, Christopher T. Robertson,
                      †††                    ††††
David V. Yokum           & Keith Joiner

                         INTRODUCTION

     We are pleased to have this opportunity to respond to Jo n-
athan Darrow’s article, Crowdsourcing Clinical Trials       (CCT). 1

We seek to highlight its important contributions and to co       m-
mence debate over some of its arguments. In particular, we

qualify the ethical arguments that characterize early clini     cal
use of drugs as if they were research, and suggest instead that,
in either domain, the ethical (and legal) analysis should remain

focused on whether all material information is provided so p a-
tients may make informed decisions. We also highlight the li m-




    †  Ameet Sarpatwari, J.D., Ph.D., Research Fellow, Harvard Medical
School, and Post-Doctoral Fellow, Program On Regulation, Therapeutics, And
Law (PORTAL), Division of Pharmacoepidemiology and Pharmacoeconomics,
Brigham and Women’s Hospital.
    †† Christopher T. Robertson, J.D., Ph.D., Visiting Professor, Harvard
Law School, and Associate Professor, James E. Rogers College of Law, Univer-
sity of Arizona.
    ††† David V. Yokum, J.D., M.A., M.A., Ph.D. Candidate, Department of

Psychology, University of Arizona.
    †††† Keith Joiner, M.D., M.P.H., ProfessoMedicine and Economics,
and Co-Director, Center for Management Innovations in Health Care, Eller
College of Management, University of Arizona. The authors wish to thank
Jonathan Darrow, Nabarun Dasgupta, Clark Freifeld, Joshua Gagne, and A a-
ron Kesselheim for their insightful comments.
    [Editor’s Note: This is a response to Jonathan J. DCrowdsouring
Clinical Trials, 98 M. L.EV . 805 (2014).]
    Copyright © 2014 by Ameet Sarp atwari, Christopher T. Robertson, David
V. Yokum, & Keith Joiner.

    1. See generally Jonathan J. Darrow, Crowdsourcing Clinical Trials , 98
M INN. L.EV. 805 (2014) [hereinafter CCT].

                               2326
2014]        CROWDSOURCING EXPERIMENTS                          2327


its of what can be gleaned from the observational data colle       c-

tion efforts envisioned by CCT.
     Ultimately, we exploit the core insights of CCT to expand
the potential use of crowdsourcing from observational studies

to truly randomized interventional trials.     Randomized experi-
ments allow causal inference because they assign subjects to a
treatment and control group, and collect data from each.        Fur-

thermore, we draw attention to the fact that much of public
health is driven not by pharmaceuticals, but by lifestyle factors.

We suggest that CCT’s envisioned platform for crowdsourcing
also has great potential to engage the public in producing new
and trustworthy knowledge in the domains of diet, exercise, nu-

tritional supplements, and integrative medicine, which are
primary drivers of health outcomes and spending.


  I. THE IMPORTANCE OF CROWDSOURCING CLINICAL
                              TRIALS

     CCT offers several key insights of importance to patients,
clinicians, academics, and policymakers. In particular, it aptly

highlights the amorphous divide between pre- approved and ap-
proved drugs, a problem that exemplifies the line          -drawing
problem inherent in many legal contexts.     2 Although our under-

standing of the safety and efficacy of a drug grows incremental-
ly from ignorance towards greater knowledge, at some point the
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is called upon to make a

binary decision about whether the product appears safe and e f-
ficacious enough to be marketed.

     CCT wisely avoids the simplistic suggestion that the FDA
should move the epistemic line to mandate more (or less) scien-
tific testing prior to marketing.  3 After all, it is costly, and p o-



    2. See, e.g., Dale Hattis, Drawing the Line: Quantitative Criteria for Risk
Management, 38 ENV T 10, 13 (1996) (noting that the requirements of the Fed-
eral Food Drug and Cosmetic Act “lead [] to a highly dichotomized view of food
safety, in which foods are either perfectly safe or completely tainted”); David
A. Weisbach, An Efficiency Analysis of Line Drawing in the Tax , 29 J.
LEGAL STUD . 71, 72 (2000) (stating that for many issues in tax law, “the policy
maker may change only the boundaries between differently treated items gi v-
en that the distinctions must exist”).
    3. Compare Andrew von Eschenbach, Medical Innovation: How the U.S.

Can Retain I ts Lead , WALL ST. J., Feb. 14, 2012, http://online.wsj.com/
news/articles/SB10001424052970203646004577215403399350874 (arguing for
a drug approval process based solely on safety, not efficacy),Alec B.
O’Connor, Building Comparative Efficacy and Tolerability into the Fp- A
proval Process, 303 J.. MED. ASSN 979, 979–80 (2010) (arguing for manda-
tory active-comparator trials).
2328              MINNESOTA LAW REVIEW                      [98:2326



tentially a zero-sum game, to move the line in either direction.
A longer period of testing precludes potential lifesaving oppo r-
tunities for using the dr ugs clinically, and those foregone sales

may reduce the manufacturers’ incentive to innovate ex ante . A
shorter period of testing prior to marketing, on the other hand,
increases the risk that unsafe and ineffective products will
make it onto the market, where they may displace standard-of-

care drugs. From the perspective of policymaking, it is hard to
say what the optimal amount of pre -market testing is as a gen-
eral matter. That is why the FDA’s expert regulators make

those decisions on a case-by-case basis.
     Instead of tinkering with the placement of the line, CCT
insightfully suggests that we make it somewhat less conse-

quential and more diffuse where possible. While there must be
some minimal threshold of proven safety and efficacy to reach
the market, the crossing of that line need not be the end of our

epistemic investments. CCT argues that the FDA should r           e-
quire rigorous scientific study of drugs even after they reach
the market, which may be conducted “by a government affilia t-
ed non -profit or the gover nment itself.”  4 This point has been
                  5
long recognized.   CCT’s contribution, however, is to show how
newly-emerging techniques and technologies of crowdsourcing
can power such an emerging reform. The article effectively a d-

dresses concerns regarding data quali ty, scientific complexity,
and ethics. It further explains why crowdsourcing is particular-
ly useful to detect rare and meaningful adverse events, which
                                                                    6
even well-powered traditional trials may be unable to capture.
With sufficiently large populations, it may even be possible to
identify markers that predict which patients are more likely to
                                                              7
suffer adverse events or more likely to benefit from drugs.     CCT
is thus on the cutting edge of personalized medicine. Ultimate-
ly, in this domain, the choice is between    lighting a candle and
cursing the darkness, and CCT wisely chooses the former.






    4. CCT, supra note 1, at 851.
    5. See, e.g., Rose Lee Bell & E. O ’Brian Smith, Clinical Trials in Post -
Marketing Surveillance of Drugs, 3 CROLLED  C LINICALTRIALS 61 (1982)
(discussing the realistic advantages of post-marketing surveillance of drugs).

    6. See CCT, supra note 1, at 842–44 (synthesizing comparisons with e x-
isting post-market surveillance and crowdsourcing—where patients can input
their adverse events personally).
    7. See id. at 846.
2014]       CROWDSOURCING EXPERIMENTS                      2329

    II. SOME QUALIFICATIONS OF THE ARGUMENTS

    A number of CCT’s arguments, however, merit extended

discussion and, in some cases, qualification. They include the
relevance of the  research-treatment divide on informed co   n-

sent, differences between CCT’s proposal and existing FDA ini-
tiatives, and the promise of observational crowdsourcing.


A. T HE R ESEARCH  -TREATMENT   DIVIDE & D ISCLOSURE OF
U NCERTAINTY

    Acknowledging that current law and ethical doctrine have
been interpreted in a contrary fashion,8 CCT cites the Nure m-
           9                              10
berg Code,   the Federal Common Rule,       and various other
strictures on human subjects research to argue that “patients
are being used as de facto test subjects following d rug approval
                                              11
without their knowledge or informed consent.”   Here, however,
we suggest that the line between research and treatment is i n-

consequential. In the literature on informed consent, it is well
settled that patients and research subjects should alik e be i n-
formed of all material facts.2CCT can be taken as arguing that

our uncertainty about a new drug’s safety is itself a material
fact for the patient’s decision, such that omission of that info r-

mation makes the patient’s choice uninformed and consent
thereby defective. If newness on the market is material to the
patient’s decision, then the FDA, drug manufacturers, and phy-

sicians have a duty to communicate such information to p     a-
tients.

    On the other hand, simply disclosing more information to
patients is not a panacea. There is a lot of information that one


   8. CCT, supra note 1, at 816 (“Under current law and practice, however,

the ‘human testing’ (which term is rarely used) that follows FDA approval has
traditionally escaped the confining strictures of human subject research on the
apparent basis that the drug has been formally tested as much as is practica-
ble, and that the discovery of adverse events -required monitoring
does not constitute human subject research at all.”).
   9. 2 TRIALS OFWAR CRIMINALSB EFORE THENUREMBERG  MILITARYTRI-
BUNALS UNDER CONTROL COUNCILL AWN O. 10 (1949).
  10. 45 C.F.R. § 46.116 (2013).

  11. CCT, supra note 1, at 811.
  12. Canterbury v. Spence, 464 F.2d . 772, 786 (D.C. Cir. 1972) (“ The scope
of the physician’s communications to the patient, then, must be measured by
the patient’s need, and that need is the information material to the decision.”);
see David S. Shimm & Roy G. SpecJr., Conflict of Interest and Informed
Consent in Industry-Sponsored Clinical Trials, 12 J. . 477, 510–13
(1991) (noting that informed consent requires full disclosure of risks and bene-

fits to experimental subjects).
2330             MINNESOTA LAW REVIEW                    [98:2326


could consider material, yet patients may rationally prefer to
defer to their physicians to synthesize this information and to

provide a bottom-line recommendation. One way to conceive of
materiality is to ask whether the information would change the
decisions of a substantial number of patients.  13On this concep-

tion, materiality raises an empirical question, and we are un-
sure of whether the newness of a drug would be material.
Whether additional infor mation will be consequential—and

perhaps more importantly whether those consequences will be
salutary on net—are open empirical questions, which are b       e-
yond the scope of CCT.

    Regardless of whether CCT persuades on these patient-
focused ethical arguments, w    e remain persuaded by CCT’s
population-level arguments, suggesting that we can promote

aggregate social welfare by collecting this information. The
costs of collecting and analyzing this information are clearly
outweighed by the benefits, as they will info rm FDA policy d e-

cisions and inform the larger scientific consensus, which should
then drive physician prescribing behavior.


B. FDA   & M  EDW ATCHER
    CCT additionally distinguishes its proposal from existing
                                                                 14
FDA efforts to harness crowdsourcing, notably MedWatc         h.
Notwithstanding CCT’s justified critique of the program, it
should be noted that the FDA has taken initial steps to adopt a

more flexible and functional reporting framework. On April 22,
2013, the Agency launched MedWatcher, a supplement to
MedWatch, an online system for the general public to report
                15
advers16events.    MedWatcher includes both Web and mobile
apps,   and is run by Epidemico, a spin-     off company of the
Computational Epidemiology Group at Boston Children’s Ho s-




   13. In a forthcoming article, some of the authors here have argued for
such a behavioral test of materiality and show how it can be operationalized in

laboratory tests of human subjects in vigbased experiments. See Roy
Spece, David Yokum, Andrea-Gale Okoro & Christopher Robertson, An Empir-
ical Method for Materiality: Would Conflict of Interest Disclosures Change P a-
tient Outcomes?, 40M. J.L. & ED. (forthcoming 2014), available at http://
papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2378524.
   14. CCT, supra note 1, at 836–39.
   15. See About MedWatcher,PIDEMICO , https://medwatcher.org/about.php
(last visited Apr. 18, 2014).
   16. Get the App,PIDEMICO, https://medwatcher.org/getapp.php (last vi s-
ited Apr. 18, 2014).
2014]        CROWDSOURCING EXPERIMENTS                         2331

      17
pital.  In addition to submitting d ata, users may also search
the system, sorting reports by product, gender, and age. To
date, there have been approximately 35,000 downloads of apps,

and there are on av18age over 1000 active MedWatcher users
on any given day.    While this new initiative doe s not yet offer
product-tailored reporting forms and is not part of a conditional

approval process emphasizing disclosure, which CCT champ          i-
ons, it does “aggregate[] patient feedback and present[] it in a
user-friendly manner,” enabling patients to “become aware of
                    19
actual drug risks.”   In this respect, MedWatcher constitutes a
potentially meaningful embrace of the principle of crowdsour c-
ing.


C. T HE  LIMITS OF  OBSERVATIONAL    C ROWDSOURCING

     Finally, CCT sensibly states that under its proposal, the
FDA would not rely solely upon crowdsourced data to approve
new indications of drugs.  20Along these lines, it is imperative to
detail more fully why the form of crowdsourcing CCT advocates

should not replace existing post- marketing surveillance efforts
(e.g., risk evalu ation and mitigation strategies [REMS] and
Mini-Sentinel) but rather supplement them. As CCT notes,

“[O]nly a fraction of patients are likely to thoroughly embrace   21
and participate in any voluntary crowdsourcing platform.”
Observational investigations util izing the platform will ther e-

fore be subject to selection bias, “[a] distortion in the estimate
of the effect due to the manner in which subjects are selected
for the study.”22

     On this point, one might quibble with CCT’s titular charac-
terization of its proposed investigations as “clinical trials.” Typ-
ically, the biomedical literature uses the term differently.

Thandani, for instance, explains, “Clinical studies can be divi d-
ed into two broad categories: trials, in which the investigator
intervenes to prevent    or treat a disease, and observational

studies, in which the investigator makes no intervention and


   17. About MedWatcher, supra note 15.
   18. E-mail from Nabarun Dasgupta, Principal, Epidemico, to Ameet
Sarpatwari, Research Fellow, Harvard Med. Sch. (Oct. 24, 2013, 11:33 EST)
(on file with author).
   19. CCT, supra note 1, at 830.
   20. Id. at 866 (explaining that crowdsourcing “attempts to capture the d a-
ta that is already being generated post -approval” and ensures that the infor-
mation is recorded and analyzed).
   21. Id. at 843.

   22. A DICTIONARY OFE PIDEMIOLOGY 225 (Miquel Porta ed., 5th ed. 2008).
2332               MINNESOTA LAW REVIEW                        [98:2326

patients are allocated treatment based on clinical decisions.”         23

As we understand the proposal, the studies conceived in CCT
generally fall in the latter category of observational research.

     Much of our current scientific knowledge is based on such
observational research, and some fields of knowledge (such as

econometrics) rely almost exclusively on such methods. Howe v-
er, the limitations of such non- randomized scientific research
deserve emphasis. In particular, the problem of self -selection is

already apparent in the nascent biomedical literature using
crowdsourcing. In 2012, Armstrong et al., analyzed data from

CureTogether, a website in which patients voluntarily report
data on the effectiveness of the drugs they are taking. Focusing
on acne treatments, they compared these crowdsourced data to

study findings reported in the peer -reviewed scientific liter a-
ture, revealing a striking disparity:

    While approximat ely 80% of tretinoin users observed clinical m-
    provement after a 12- week treatment period in clinical trials, 46% of
    online users reported improvement in an unspecified time period. For
    most topical treatments, medication with high efficacy in clinical tr i-
    als did not produce high effectiveness ratings based on the
    crowdsourced online data.4

     The smaller effects seen in the crowdsourced data may be
due to unsatisfied patients seeking out the CureTogether site

and reporting their frustration in greater numbers          than satis-
fied pimple -free patients, who have other priorities for their
time. 25 The foregoing example deals with the effectiveness of

drugs, but similar dynamics apply to adverse events in obse            r-
vational studies. If one assumes that patients suffering adverse

events are more likely to submit a report, then the data are
likely to overestimate the rate of adverse events.



   23. Ravi Thadhani, Chapter 14: Formal Trials Versus Observational Stud-
ies, in FBRY D ISEASE: PERSPECTIVES FROM  5 YEARS OF  FOS (Atul Mehta et
al., eds., 2006), available at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK11586/.
   24. April W. Armstrong et al., Harnessing the Power of Crowds:
Crowdsourcing as a Novel Research Method for Evaluation of Acne Trea   t-
ments, 13 AM. J. LINICAL DERMATOLOGY   405, 405 (2012).

   25. Admittedly, the smaller effects may also be due, in part, to well-
known problems with clinical research trials. See generally Unreliable e-
search: Trouble at the Lab, EONOMIST , Oct. 19, 2013, http://www.economist
.com/news/briefing/21588057-scientists-think-science-self-correcting-alarming
-degree-it-not-trouble (discussing the problem of irreproducibility of scientific
experiments across disciplines). For these reasons, many clinical trials are
themselves unable to be successfully replicated. See C. Glenn Begley & Lee M.
Ellis, Raise Standards for Preclinical Cancer Research , 483 NE  531, 532
(2012) (reporting being able to replicate scientific findings in only six of fifty -

three landmark preclinical research studies).
2014]        CROWDSOURCING EXPERIMENTS                          2333


     Even though the observational studies CCT envisions will
not provide accurate assessments of the rates of adverse events,

they will nonethe less prove invaluable for generating info        r-
mation on potential causal associations (i.e., signals). To pr     o-
vide sufficient drug safety information from which to base regu-

latory deci26ons, however, these signals must be refined and
evaluated,   steps that can utilize Mini-Sentinel and REMS, re-
spectively. The former initiative, though complex,     27has assem-

bled the infrastructure necessary to test for the existence of a s-
sociations between drugs and adverse events having already
accumulated “over 300 million person-        years of observation

time, 2.4 billion unique encounters including 38 million acute      28
inpatient stays, and 2.9 billion dispensing of prescriptions.”
Through REMS, meanwhile, the FDA can compel manufactur-

ers to conduct mor29systematic, registry-based investigations to
assess causality.   While each is insufficient alone at this time,
collectively, crowdsourcing, Mini- Sentinel, and REMS provide

the FDA with the tools necessary to craft a powerful post-
marketing surveillance system.


      III. RANDOMIZED CROWDSOURCED TRIALS OF
                 LIFESTYLE INTERVENTIONS

     CCT concludes by noting that while “[t]he instant proposal
is a relatively modest one that involves crowdsourcing of only
the post-approval phase of drug evaluation, . . . it is easy to im-
                                     30
agine a more expanded version. ”       We would like to take this
opportunity to pick up the mantle to extend these ideas in new
directions.

     Going beyond CCT’s domain of observational studies of
FDA-approved pharmaceuticals, there is considerable potential
in using crowdsourcing to perform truly randomized trials (i.e.,


   26. See Richard Platt et al., The U.S. Food and Drug Administration’s
Mini-Sentinel Program: Status and Direction , 21 PCOEPIDEMIOLOGY   &
DRUG  SAFETY 1, 2 (2012) (defining signal refinement as “the assessment of
predefined exposure-outcome pairs to determine whether there is evidence of
association” and signal evaluation as “assessing whether an association is like-
ly to be causal, and addressing questions such as d-response, duration -

response, and inter-individual variability in risk”).
   27. See CCT, supra note 1, at 840–41 (describing Sentinel as “layered and
cumbersome” and noting that the FDA acknowledges that it is a “ complex en-
deavor”).
   28. Platt et al., supra note 26, at 4.
   29. See 21 U.S.C. § 355- 1(f)(3) (2012) (describing elements to assure safe
use).
   30. CCT, supra note 1, at 866–67.
2334               MINNESOTA LAW REVIEW                       [98:2326

experiments), and to do so in the domain lifestyle interventions

that could combat such diverse and pressing public health
problems as obesity, migraines, smoking, and back pain. This

expansion of CCT’s platform could also allow investigation of
the many health- related interventions that fall outside of the
FDA’s current legal jurisdiction to mandate scientific research.

While most of these interventions are not readily amenable to
analysis using post- marketing surveillance of the sorts di          s-

cussed above, it is possible that the same technological pla         t-
form and recruitment mechanisms            proposed by CCT could
power these broader investigations.

     The need is pressing. Lifestyle factors are primary drivers
of health and health spending in the United States.       31A third of

all deaths 32e attributed to tobacco use, poor diet, and physical
inactivity.   Over 30 million Americans, meanwhile, suffer from
                        33
migraines each year,      and one in four reports having exper i-
enced lower back pain lasting the whole day over the last three-
months.  34 Collectively, the economic impact of these lifestyle      -

related diseases is staggering; Finkelstein et al. estimate that
the costs of treating obesity-related conditions alone could total
$147 billion annually.  35

     These examples remind health policy scholars that ind           i-
viduals do not intrinsically value the prescription drugs that

are the focus of CCT. What people seek is health, and there are
many paths to that outcome. One way to conceptualize this d y-

namic is to say that individuals m36e decisions to maximize
their “stock” of health capital.    People make time-based trade-



   31. Louis Goodman & Timothy Norbeck, Who’s to Blame for Our Rising
Healthcare Costs?, FORBES , Apr. 3, 2013, http://www.forbes.com/sites/real
spin/2013/04/03/whos-to-blame-for-our-rising-healthcare-costs/ (categorizing

“life style and chronic conditions” as vital drivers of healthcare costs, as well
as “the most preventable” kind).
   32. Ali H. Mokdad et al., Actual Causes of Death in the United States,
2000, 291 J. M. MED. ASSN 1238, 1240 (2004).
   33. R.B. Lipton et al., Migraine Prevalence, Disease Burden, and the Need
for Preventive Therapy, 68N EUROLOGY  343, 346–47 (2007) (reporting that
11.7% of Americans suffer from migraines annually and that, of t hose, 25.7%
should be offered prevention).

   34. Richard A. Deyo et al.,Back Pain Prevalence and Visit Rates: Esti-
mates from U.S. National Surveys, 2002, 31 SE 2724, 2725 (2006).
   35. Eric A. Finkelstein et al., Annual Medical Spending Attributable to
Obesity: Payer and Service- Specific Estimates, 28EALTH  A FF. 822, 822
(2009).
   36. See generally Michael Grossman, On the Concept of Health Capital

and the Demand for Health , 80 J. POL. ECON . 224 (1972) (conceptualizing
2014]        CROWDSOURCING EXPERIMENTS                         2335

offs between work, leisure, medical care, and home goods pr       o-

duction. While illness, aging, and unhealthy behaviors (e.g.,
smoking) lead to consumption of health capital, other actions
(e.g., education, income generation, and healthy eating) repr e-

sent investments that produce health capital. For example, i n-
dividuals commonly choose to substitute unhealthy processed
foods for home-cooked goods, not primarily because the benefits
of the latter are unclear, but because the time allotted to pr    e-

pare the latter cannot be justified in 37mparison to other activi-
ties that also impact health capital.    Crowdsourcing can elicit
choices around health capital maximization and engage the

public in producing knowledge about how to best produce the
health outcomes that they experience and value.

A. C  ANDIDATES FOR   INVESTIGATION

     As candidates for crowdsourced testing beyond that pr        o-
posed by CCT, we proffer three categories of activities as inte r-

ventions. They include activities for which good biological evi-
dence exists but behavioral      testing is lacking to activities,
which though widely practiced, have uncertain biological justi-

fication.
     To start, there are activities for which there is an “accepted
wisdom” and clear biological plausibility but which require b e-

havioral change. Some o f these activities are believed to be
beneficial—exercise, healthy eating, and weight control. Others
are known to be harmful —smoking and excessive drinking. In
this domain, crowdsourced randomized experiments would

generate useful knowledge about which be        havioral interve n-
tions are most effective in achieving better health outcomes.
For example, it has long been understood that effective weight

control depends on roughly balancing calories consumed with
those expended, but this goal proves difficult for many people to
achieve. 38Recent scientific research, popularized by several



health as human capital and exploring various effects that individual choice
has on one’s stock throughout the course of one’s life).
   37. See Arleen A. Leibowitz, The Demand for Health and Health Concerns
After 30 Years, 23 J.ALTH ECON . 663, 669 (2004) (suggesting that working
mothers may be inclined to “substitute prepared foods for their own time in
producing meals for their children” despite the fact that prepared meals are
generally less healthy).
   38. See, e.g., Healthy Weight, Balancing Calories , CDC, http://www.cdc
.gov/healthyweight/calories/ (last updated Jan. 15, 2004) (explaining that the
key to maintaining a healthy weight is “balancing the number of calories you
consume with the number of calories your body uses or ‘burns off’”).
2336              MINNESOTA LAW REVIEW                     [98:2326


books, has suggested that a diet based on fasting once per

week, may be more effective than trying to manage caloric i n-
take all week. Nonetheless, this method has not been tested in

large-scale randomized experiments, which could identify the
benefits and risks of this particular approach to behavior         -

modification.
     Next, there are activities that are intended to eliminate or

diminish some undesirable symptom —back pain, migraines,
and insomnia—but which are supported by only anecdotal evi-

dence and may not be effective despite being biological plausi-
ble. Lifestyle modifications to manage migraines, for example,

include sleep hygiene, stress management, regular exercise,
and a variety of d iets.40Some of these diets involve the avoi d-

ance of potential food triggers (e.g., alcohol, chocolate, caffeine,
and monosodium glutamate).      41Conversely, others recommend

the addition of vitamins and supplements, including magnesi-
um, riboflavin, CoQ10, feve rfew, and butterbur. Studies, many

of which are randomized, have investigated these individual
agents relative to placebo, showing benefit.   42Small sample siz-

es and lack of comparison between agents, however, limit the
generalizability of the conclusions. 43The crowdsourced platform

could be used to test combinations of therapies, often in factor i-
al design, with statistical power deriving from large sample

sizes. In such instances, it would often be more attractive to use
a “knockout” study, which asks partic ipants to remove a poten-



   39. See, e.g.AMES B. OHNSON  & DONALD  R. AUB , HE ALTERNATE -DAY

DIET: URN ON  YOUR “SKINNY GENE ,”HED THE P OUNDS ,AND LIVE ALONGER
AND  HEALTHIER  LIFE (2009); MICHAEL  M OSLEY & M  IMI SPENCER, T HE
FASTD IET: OSE WEIGHT , TAYH EALTHY ,AND LIVELONGER WITH THE S IMPLE
SECRET OF NTERMITTENT  FASTING (2013).
   40. Migraine: Non-Drug Treatments and Lifestyle ChangeN.Y. TIMES,

http://www.nytimes.com/health/guides/disease/migraine/non-drug-treatments
-and-lifestyle-changes.html (last updated Dec. 23, 2013) (recommending the
following lifestyle changes in order to relieve migraines: avoid food triggers
such as monosodium glutamate, chocolate, and caffeine; eat regularly; stay
physically active; limit estrogen-containing medications).

   41. See id.
   42. See, e.g., D.A. Marcus et al., A DouBlind Provocative Study of
Chocolate as a Trigger of Headache, 17 CLAGIA  855 (1997) (finding that,
contrary to popular belief, chocolate does not appear to be a triggi- for m
graines); A. Verotti et al., Impact of a W eight Loss Program on Migraine in

Obese Adolescents, 20 E. J. EUROLOGY  394 (2013) (finding that interven-
tion programs of health eating and cognitive stimulation, which yield lower
BMIs, were linked to fewer migraines).
   43. Cf. Verotti et al., supra note 42, at 397 (recognizing that their study is
limited by its lack of a control group).
2014]        CROWDSOURCING EXPERIMENTS                        2337


tial cause of migraines or remove a potential homeopathic
treatment, rather than asking them to start a new one.

    Last, there are activities that are purported to have benefit
but for which the evidence is lacking or contradictory, and bio-

logical plausibility is often tenuous at best. In general, the lack
of evidence for these activities stems from the inability or un-

willingness to conduct large -scale trials, given the complexity,
cost, and, for advocates, the unstated but real fear that they

will be ineffective at best and harmful at worst. Two prominent
candidates for scientific testing within this domain are the
practice of integrative medicine and consumption of many di e-

tary supplements. Integrative medicine aspires to bridge the
gap between traditional western medicine, behavioral change,
                                                       44
and health promoting activities from other cultures.     While its
less “standard” interventions, which include massage, reiki,

and aroma therapy practiced in conjunction with traditional
medicine, are widely popular in the United States, evidence is

typically lacking that they have benefit. Almost half of all
Americans and two -thirds of all cancer patients, meanwhile,
consume dietary supplements, whose sales surpass $30 billion
          45
annually.   These products, however, are only lightly regulated
by the FDA such that their efficacy remains largely unclear.     46

Illustrative of the issue, the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia
recently announced that most dietary supplements would be

removed from the47ospital f ormulary, the first hospital in the
nation to do so.  Crowdsourcing provides an opportunity to test
these interventions in a comparative fashion.





   44. See generally Ralph Snyderman & Andrew T. Weil, Integra tive Medi-
cine: Bringing Medicine Back to its Roots, 162 ASINTERNAL M ED. 395

(2002).
   45. See U.S. OV’TA CCOUNTABILITYO FFICE, GAO-13-244, IETARYS UP-
PLEMENTS : FDA MAY HAVE OPPORTUNITIES TOE XPAND ITSUSE OFR EPORTED
H EALTH PROBLEMS TO OVERSEE P RODUCTS 1 (2013), available at http://www
.gao.gov/assets/660/
653113.pdf; Mary L. Hardy, Dietary Supplement Use in Cancer Care: Help or

Harm, 22 HEMATOLOGY /ONCOLOGY C LIN. N.MA. 581, 581 (2008).
   46. James D. Lewis & Brian L. Strom, Balancing Safety ietary Sup-
plements with the Free Market, 13NNALS INTERNAL M ED. 616, 617 (2002)
(“[T]here are no data for most supplements, merely because they do not claim
to prevent or treat specific medical conditions.”).

   47. Press Release, Children’s Hosp. of Phila. , Children’s Hosp . of Phila.
Becomes First in Nation to Disallow Use of Dietary Supplements (Oct. 8,
2013), available at http://www.eurekalert.org/pub_releases/2013-10/chop-cho10
0813.php.
2338              MINNESOTA LAW REVIEW                     [98:2326

B. A  DVANTAGES OF   R ANDOMIZED    CROWDSOURCED     T RIALS

     Randomized crowdsourced trials for lifestyle interventions

present several advantages. First, given the FDA’s limited j u-
risdiction to mandate scientific research and the impracticabi l-
ity of the widespread use of traditional clinical trials in this set-

ting, the vast majority of lifestyle interventions would not
otherwise be rigorously tested. These lifestyle choices are pr    i-
mary drivers of health outcomes and health spending, and our

current ignorance about their risk and benefits is unacceptable.
     Second, although it would not be possible to blind patients

and investigators to many lifestyle interventions, randomiz a-
tion would nevertheless permit the distribution of both known
and unknown confounders equally between the intervention
                                                        48
and active-comparator (of placebo) arms of the trial.     Random-
ized crowdsourced trials would, in this respect, resemble open -
                                                                  49
label pharmaceutical trials, which the FDA considers robust.
Randomization may also be attractive to participants, since it
will function like a game or lottery. Individuals pre -commit to

participate, and then are randomly assigned to do something in
their own lives and to report back the results to the crowd.

     Third, as CCT emphasizes, crowdsourcing would enable
the enrollment of potentially thousands of participants, i       n-
creasing the ability of trials to detect associations. Indeed, i n-

creased statistical power resulting from crowdsourcing will
permit investigators to explore the best combination of inte      r-
                                                         50
ventions for tackling complex public health epidemics.
     Finally, such trials would help fuel patient      -driven r e-
search. Crowdsourcing can be used not only to secure trial pa r-

ticipants but also to generate research hypothesis, to identify


   48. Chris Roberts & David TorgersonUnderstanding Controlled Trial s:
Randomisation Methods in Controlled Trials, 317 B. MED. J. 1301, 1301
(1998) (“The main purpose of randomisation is to avoid bias by distributing the
characteristics of patients that may influence outcome randomly between

treatment groups so that any difference in outcome can be explained only by
treatment.”).
   49. See U.S.FDA, GUIDANCE FOR INDUSTRY : E9 TATISTICALP RINCIPLES
FOR CLINICAL TRIALS11 (1998) (noting that while double- blind trials are op-
timal, open-labeled trials may prove the only option owing to issues of pract i-
cability and ethics).
   50. See, e.g., Guangwei Li et al., The Long -Term Effect of Lifestyle Inter-
ventions to Prevent Diabetes in the China Da Qing Diabetes Prevention Study:
A 20-Year Follow-Up Study, 371 LNCET 1783 (2008); Martha L. Skender et

al., Comparison of 2- Year Weight Loss Trends in Behavioral Treatments of
Obesity: Diet, Exercise, and Combination Interventions, 96 J.IETETIC
ASS’N342 (1996).
2014]       CROWDSOURCING EXPERIMENTS                    2339

meaningful clinical outcomes, and to disseminate trial findings.

This potential for empowerment is consistent with the broader
movement to increase stakeholder participation in all stages of
public health research and policymaking, most notably the r e-
                                                            51
cently created Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute.
We hope to democratize health -related research, as long as we
can do so without sacrificing rigor.


C. C HALLENGES OF  R ANDOMIZED  C ROWDSOURCED   T RIALS:
U SING BEHAVIORAL  SCIENCE AND  SELF -QUANTIFICATION TO
ENHANCE   ADHERENCE AND   D ATA COLLECTION

    Using crowdsourcing as a vehicle to conduct randomized
trials of lifestyle interventions, however, will not be free of chal-

lenges. In particular, two methodological concerns stand out:
participant adherence to the trial protocol and the quality of
data collected, given that the platform will largely depend on
self-reported data. As CCT notes, “Laypersons m   ay be pe r-

ceived as lacking the appropriate education, e52erience, or m o-
tivation to reliably obtain or enter clinical data.”
    CCT successfully dispels some of this worry. We build upon

this defense by arguing that the concerns are not simply obsta-
cles but also opportunities, both for the crowdsourcing platform
and underlying public health studies, which will also be con-

cerned with adherence and self  -perceived outcomes. On one
hand, existing behavioral research could be used to design the
platform so as to m aximize compliance with data reporting r e-
sponsibilities; on the other hand, the platform could also be

used to field new experiments on what compliance interve   n-
tions are most effective. Several behavioral tactics are relevant
here.

    The crowdsourced platform should prompt people to devel-
op a concrete plan for how they will actually implement an i n-
tention. In prior lab and field experiments, such planning has
been repeatedly shown to increase attainment of desired





  51. See Patient Protection and Affordable Ca§ 6301, 42 U.S.C.
§ 1320e (2012) (“The purpose of the Institute is to assist patients, clinicians,
purchasers, and policy -makers in making informed health decisions by ad-
vancing the quality and relevance of evidence concerning the manner in which
diseases, disorders, and othe r health conditions can effectively and appropri-
ately be prevented, diagnosed, treated, monitored, and managed through re-
search and evidence synthesis . . . .”).
  52. CCT, supra note 1, at 845.
2340               MINNESOTA LAW REVIEW                         [98:2326


goals. 53Milkman et al., for example, conducted a field exper          i-

ment wherein employees were randomly assigned to receive
one of two mailings about workplace vaccination clinics.         54Each

mailing included the same information about clinic availability,
but one letter also included optional blank spaces for writing in

the day and time of when the recipient planned to visit the clin-
ic.55This simple intervention significantly increased the rate of
              56
vaccination.    Implementation intention effects have been found
in other health domains—colorectal screening,        57cervical screen-
    58                     59                                60
ing,   physical exercise, and breast self-examination —as well
as non-health domains, such as voting.       61 Crowdsourced compli-

ance rates could thus be boosted by having participants form an
implementation intenti on. When registering into the online

system, users could be prompted to specify when and upon
which computer they will update their profiles each week, and

exactly what routine they will use for the intervention. Such
testing of implementation intentions w ill also enhance our un-

derstanding of behavioral science.





   53. The mechanism of effect is a current area of study.  See generally
Thomas L. Webb & Paschal Sheeran, Mechanisms of Implementation Intention
Effects: The Role of Goal Intentions, Se-Efficacy, and Accessibility of Plan
Components, 47 B RIT. J.OC. PSYCHOL . 373 (2008).
   54. Katherine L. Milkman et al., Using Implementation Intentions

Prompts to Enhance Influenza Vaccination Rates, 108 PROC . AT . CAD . SC.
10,415 (2011). In fact, there was a third condition.However, only two are
discussed here to simplify the example.
   55. Id. at 10,416.

   56. Id.
   57. Katherine L. Milkman et al., Planning Prompts as a Means of Increas-
ing Preventive Screening Rates, 56REVENTIVE M ED . 92, 92 (2013).
   58. Paschal Sheeran & Sheina Orbell, Using Implementation Intentions to

Increase Attendance for Cervical Cancer Screening , 1EALTH P SYCHOL . 283,
286 (2000).
   59. Sarah Milne, Sheina Orbell & Paschal Sheeran, Combining Motiv   a-
tional and Volitional Interventions to Promote Exercise Participation: c-ote
tion Motivation Theory and Implementation Intentions, 7 B RIT. J. HEALTH

PSYCHOL . 163, 172 (2002).
   60. Sheina Orbell, Sarah Hodgkins & Paschal Sheeran, Implementation
Intentions and the Theory of Planned Behavior, 23      PERSONALITY   SOC.
PSYCHOL . BULL. 945, 950 (1997).
   61. David W. Nickerson & Todd Rogers, Do You Have a Voting Plan? I m-

plementation Intentions, Voter Turnout, and Organic Plan Making      , 21
PSYCHOL . SCI. 194, 196 (2010) ; see also Utpal M. Dholakia & Richard P.
Bagozzi, As Time Goes By: How Goal and Implementation Intentions Influence
Enactment of Short- Fuse Behaviors, 33 J.APPLIED  SOC. PSYCHOL . 889, 901
(2003) (showing the effect with errands).
2014]         CROWDSOURCING EXPERIMENTS                           2341


     The crowdsourced platform should reinforce salutary social
norms. CCT emphasizes that there may be a mutually-

reinforcing dynamic between providers and consumers of i            n-
formation, a loop that crowdsourcing can close.      62Indeed, infor-

mation about what others are actually doi63 has also been
found to have an effect on behavior.       In particular, people are

more likely to mimic the behavior believed to be most common,  64
regardless of whether that behavior is so cially approved.        Ear-
ly work showed that this insight has important and counteri n-

tuitive implications. A public service campaign warning that
underage college drinking is an epidemic to be combated, for

example, might inadvertently increase underage drinking, be-
cause the implicit descriptive norm       —many college students

binge drink —drives behavior more65han the normative argu-
ment against binge drinking.       In contrast, when students who

are heavy drinkers are truthfully educated that most students
actually drin k relatively little, their alcohol consumption d      e-
clines.66 Similar results have been found in studies aiming to
                  67                  68
reduce littering,   park vandalism,      and household energy con-
sumption.  69Crowdsource users could likewise be informed that

most of their peers were consistently reporting data and adher-
ing with the intervention under investigation, which would i n-

crease their own compliance. Here, too, crowdsourced trials



   62. CCT, supra note 1, at 849 (describing a “better-aligned mix of motiva-
tions” and having “a dog in the race”).
   63. See Robert B. Cialdini, Crafting Normative Messages to Protect the

Environment, 12 C URRENT  DIRECTIONS P SYCHOL. SCI. 105, 106 (2003). D e-
scriptive norms are in contrast to injunctive norms, which pertain to beliefs
about what should be done. Craig Michael Mc Nees, Two Kinds of Norms, A
PLIED SOC. PSYCHOL . (Nov. 29, 2012, 8:54 PM), http://www.personal. psu.edu/
bfr3/blogs/asp/2012/11/two-kinds-of-norms.html.
   64. Cialdini, supra note 63, at 108–09.

   65. See generally Brian Borsari & Kate B. Carey, Descriptive and Injunc-
tive Norms in College Drinking: A Meta -Analytic Integration, 6TUD. AL-
COHOL  331 (2003).
   66. See Clayton Neighbors, Mary E. Larimer & Melissa A. Lewis, Target-
ing Misperceptions of Descriptive Drinking Norms: Efficacy of a Computer-
Delivered Personalized Normative Feedback Intervention, 72 J. CTING  &

CLINICAL PSYCHOL . 434, 438 (2004).
   67. See generally Robert B. Cialdini, Raymond R. Reno & Carl A.
Kallgren, A Focus Theory of Normative Conduct: Recycling the Concept of
Norms to Reduce Littering  in Public Places , 58 J. ERSONALITY  & SOC .
PSYCHOL . 1015 (1990).

   68. Cialdini, supra note 63, at 106.
   69. Hunt Allcott, Social Norms and Energy Conservation , 95 J. PUB .
ECON . 1082, 1087 (2011).
2342               MINNESOTA LAW REVIEW                        [98:2326


could also be conducted to help resolve some of the controversy
behind when and how social norms exert their effects.

     Finally, the crowdsourced platform should take advantage
of self-identities: the “salient and enduring aspects of one’s self-
perception.”  70Depending on the circumstances, one might ide n-

tify oneself as a student, a political advocate, o          r here, a
crowdsourcing health experimenter. As Rise et al.            elaborate:

“self-identities (or “me” identifications) are the perspective one
takes toward oneself when taking the role of specific or general-
ized others, implying that one incorporates the meanings and

expectations associated with a relevant categorization into the
self, thus forming a set of identity standards that guide identi-
                          71
ty-relevant behaviors.”      Behavior can be a functio72of which
self-identity is salient at the moment of action.       In one experi-
ment, for example, residents were contacted just before an elec-

tion and asked to complete a survey, which was experimentally
manipulated to prime voter or baseline identities.         73After the

election, public voting records showed that those primed with 74
voter identity were significantly more likely to vote.           Active

participation in the crowdsourcing might shift users from a
passive patient identity into a more active health- experimenter
identity, a shift that would likely enhance adherence and data

reporting.
     Even so, it will be critical for all crowdsourced trials to co l-

lect a mix of objective (e.g., blood pressure and weight) and sub-
jective (e.g., quality of life surveys) measures that are easily as-

certainable using standardized, validated techniques. The


   70. Jostein Rise, Paschal Sheeran & Silje Hukkelberg, The Role of Se-f
Identity in the Theory of Planned Behavior: A Met-Analysis, 40 J. PPLIED
SOC . SYCHOL . 1085, 1087 (2010).
   71. Id. (internal citations omitted).
   72. LeBoeuf, Shafir, and Bayuk, for example, had undergraduates re-

spond to questions about either geopolitical or campus -related gender issues,
priming scholarly and socialite identities, respectively. Robyn A. LeBoeuf,
Eldar Shafir & Julia Belyavsky Bayuk, The Conflicting Choices of Alternating
Selves, 111 ORGANIZATIONAL  B EHAV . & HUM . DECISION  PROCESSES  48, 50
(2010). They found that the former preferred periodicals such The Econo-
mist and The Wall Street Journal while the latter choseCosmopolitan and
USA Today. Id.

   73. See Christopher J. Bryan et al., Motivating Voter Turnout by Invoking
the Self, 108 PC . NATL ACAD . CI. 12,653 (2011). The precise manipulation,
based on prior research, was to refer to voting as a -relevant noun (e.g.,
“How important is it to you to bea voter in the upcoming election?”) as op-
posed to voting as a verb (e.g., “How important is it for you to vote p- the u
coming election?”). Id.
   74. Id. at 12,654–65.
2014]        CROWDSOURCING EXPERIMENTS                          2343


quantified self movement is an important form of self -identity
that is already developing to exploit a plethora of new self        -
                                                   75
tracking devices along the lines we suggest.          As one of its
founders, Gary Wolf, notes,
    Numbers are making their way into the smallest crevices of our lives.

    We have pedometers in the soles of our shoes and phones that can
    post our location as we move around town. We can tweet what we eat
    into a database . . . . There are sites and programs for monitoring
    mood, pain, blood sugar, blood pressure, heart rate, cognitive alacrity,
    menstruation, and prayers. Even sleep . . . is yielding to the skill of
    the widget maker. With an accelerometer and some decent alg o-
    rithms, you will soon be able to record your sleep patterns with tec h-
    nology that costs less than $100.

     Some of these apps have already garnered FDA approval
as alternatives to more traditional medical devices.    77Many oth-

ers devices—such as the new iPhone, which includes a dedica t-
ed processing unit to track the owner’s physical activities—are
not regulated by the FDA at all, because they do not make

health claims. Whether it is a scale that automatically uploads
weight measurements to the internet, a phone GPS that shows
the number of miles jogged, or a phone camera that allows o th-

er crowd -participants to code the caloric content of photo-
graphed food, these devices will allow collection of real -time ob-
jective data from the crowd. In these ways, the quantified self -

movement allowing assessment of both compliance with the e x-
perimental interventions (independent variables) and health
outcomes (dependent variables).


D. F  OSTERING   NTEGRITY AND    T RUST

     It will be imperative for developers of the crowdsourced
platform to foster public trust, as both a safe place for partic i-

pating in experimentation, and also as a destination for reliable
health information. Talk is often cheap in this domain, and
many contested lifestyle health choices have related industries

and self -proclaimed experts. Conflicts of interest currently
plague the healthcare system, casting doubt even on clinical
guidelines in peer     -reviewed    journals.78  Thus, this new


   75. See Gary Wolf, The Data -Driven Life , N.Y.IMES, Apr. 28, 2010,
http://www.nytimes.com/2010/05/02/magazine/02self-measurement-t.html.

   76. Gary Wolf, Know Thyself: Tracking Every Facet of Life, from Sleep to
Mood to Pain, 24/7/365, WIRED MAG ., June 22, 2009, http://www.wired.com/
medtech/health/magazine/17-07/lbnp_knowthyself.
   77. Sabrina Tavernise, F.D.A. Will Apply Its Rules to Only Some Health
Apps, N.Y.TIMES, Sept. 24, 2013, at A12.
   78. See, e.g., Lisa Cosgrove et al., Conflicts of Interest and the Quality of
2344              MINNESOTA LAW REVIEW                    [98:2326


crowdsourcing institution should be designed from the ground
up to engender integrity and credibility.

     Accordingly, the crowdsourced platform should operate on
a strictly not-for-profit basis. Whether it should be closely tied
                               79
to the FDA as CCT suggests,      however, is debatable. Concerns
over political influence and bureaucratic constraints suggest
that an independent nonprofit but entrepreneurial organization

may be more nimble and engender greater public participation
than a government-run platform would.
     A useful model here is Wikipedia, which permits public

submissio80, editing, and initiation of “Articles for Deletion”
reviews.   Although not without weaknesses, Wikipedia science
entries were found to have comparable accuracy to Encyclop e-
                                                            81
dia Britannica articles in a 2005    Nature investigation.     The
crowdsourcing platform may be able to thoughtfully bridge the
gap between health scientists at elite academic institutions and

members of the general public.
     As we move into true experiments, the crowdsourced pla t-

form will further require its own Institutional Review Board
(IRB), which engages the public in setting standards and
weighing risks; transparent informed consent forms that do not

bury risks in verbiage; and concrete plans for handling adverse
events. We believe that these needs create a great opportunity
to reengage the public in thinking about and setting standards

for human subjects research, rather than mere        ly delegating
these tasks to the academics, who currently dominate IRBs. Of
course, as a bare minimum, the platform must strictly comply

with federal privacy standards in the Health Insurance Porta-
bility and Accounting Act (HIPAA) and the Health Informatio n
Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act (HITECH)

and human subject protections codified in the Common Rule, to
the extent that those statues and rules are applicable.





Recommendations in Clinical Guidelines, 19 VALUATION C LINICALPRAC.
674 (2012).
   79. See CCT, supra note 1, at 851 (“For this reason, the-approval

phase of drug evaluation should pr obably be administered either by a govern-
ment affiliated non-profit or the government itself.”).
   80. HBS Cases: How Wikipedia Works (or Doesn’t)      ,  WORKING
KNOWLEDGE  : HE THINKING THAT L EADS (Harvard Bus. Sch., Boston , Mass),
July 23,007, at 2, available at http://hbswk.hbs.edu/item/5605.html.
   81. Jim Giles, Internet Encyclopaedias Go Head to H, 438 NATURE
900, 900–01 (2005).
2014]       CROWDSOURCING EXPERIMENTS                    2345


                        CONCLUSION
    In sum, we share CCT’s enthusiasm for crowdsourcing, and
believe that citizens and scientists should critically understand

the strengths and weaknesses of this new tool for generating
and communicating knowledge. Beyond the collection of obse r-
vational data about pharmaceutical drugs proposed in CCT, we
believe that such a crowdsourcing platform holds great promise
for generating trustworthy knowledge and behavior change

about some of the largest drivers of mortality and morbidity. So
much of health outcomes and spending depend on lifestyle
choices, and in this domain we desperately need new models for
engaging the public to create greater understanding and i m-
proved behaviors. Thus, the envisioned crowdsourcing platform

could provide a robust and citizen-driven process of inquiry and
a destination for robust and reliable information, so that ind i-
viduals can achieve their own health goals.