    Chapter 5

Data Privacy and Ethical Uses of Volunteered
Geographic Information






      AbstrTahcetre is great potential for volunteered geographic information (VGI) to
augment data used for public health disease surveillance, in areas such as mass
gatherings and qualitative GIS. The goal of this chapter is to explore these important
issues of patient privacy, ethics, and liability, as they pertain to the use of VGI to

augment health information exchanges (HIEs) in providing data for public health
research programs. The current attention on health reform and HIEs provide profes-
sional geographers with an excellent opportunity to explore the contributions of
VGI to this ﬁ eld. The chapter begins by brieﬂ   y describing the legislation of
patient privacy and protection in the United States, such as the Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) and the American Recovery

and Reinvestment Act of 2009. It also discuss the appropriate and inappropriate
disclosures of protected health information (PHI). Next, it examines the ethical and
legal issues surrounding the use ofVGI in disease surveillance. Finally, the chapter
will demonstrate thatVGI yields tremendous value in providing sensitive and timely
surveillance data when reliable and consistent communications between health care
providers and regional health authorities are not possible.


  Keywords Volunteered geographic information        •  Protected health information    •
  Ethics • Data liability • HIPAA • Patient privacy



5.1              Introduction


Volunteered geographic information (VGI) a term is attributed to Dr. Michael
Goodchild, a professional geographer who coined it in 2007 to describe the practice
of observing, collecting and producing geographic information by people who have
no formal training in geospatial data [1].VGI has gained prominence in the general
public because of Web 2.0 – i.e., the online technologies that have transformed the
Internet into a platform for the collaboration, production and distribution of infor-

mation. Examples of Web 2.0 technologies include geospatial browsers, mobile
devices, and cloud computing services. Cloud computing services currently allow
users to conveniently access a shared pool of computing resources – e.g., networks,
servers, storage, and applications – that can be rapidly deployed with minimal



A.J. Blatt, Health, Science, and Place, Geotechnologies and the Environment 12,9
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-12003-4_5
50                  5  Data Privacy and Ethical Uses of Volunteered Geographic Information
































 Fig. 5.1Ushahidi is a non-proﬁt technology company that demonstrates the use of VGI in crisis
management ( http://www.ushahidi.com/, Accessed 17 Nov 2014)


effort or technical support. When used appropriately, Web 2.0 transforms data

consumers into data producers (i.e., map-makers and cartographers) [2 ].
   In recent years, VGI has been used to map crisis situations, such as the Haitian
earthquakes in 2010, and relief efforts in forest ﬁ res, ﬂoods, hurricanes and other
natural disasters (Fig. 5.1). After the volunteer contributors capture and record

information using their own mobile devices (such as smartphones and GPS units),
they can submit their data to a website or central agency that analyzes, reviews and
publishes the information on base maps provided by OpenStreetMap or Google
Maps. While some authorities may question the reliability and accuracy of VGI-

based maps, the timely production of near instantaneous geospatial information
during times of crisis has proven to be invaluable [3 ,4 ].
   As with any new introduction of ideas, many legal and ethical issues surround
this exchange of geospatial information, especially in the ﬁ eld of disease surveil-

lance. One important issue concerning patient privacy involves the location-based
devices that record the identities, positions, movements, and other characteristics
of the contributors of the health information [ 5]. Another issue is the nature of
these contributors of health information and the types of unstated agreements they

may be entering into, by their volunteerism [ 6 ,7]. Finally, public health ofﬁ cials
5.2  HIPAA Legislation and Patient Privacy Protections                              51


and health care organizations are understandably concerned with the credibility of
the health geographic data offered and the algorithms used to validate the truthful-
ness of VGI [8 ,9 ].

   The goal of this chapter is to explore these important issues of patient privacy,
ethics, and liability, as there is a great potential forVGI to augment health informa-
tion exchanges (HIEs) in providing data for public health research programs. The
attention on health reform and HIEs provide professional geographers with an
excellent opportunity to explore the contributions of VGI to this ﬁ eld. To address

these contributions, this chapter will brieﬂy describe the legislation of patient pri-
vacy and protection in the United States. Then, it will present a candid discussion of
the ethical and legal issues surrounding VGI in disease surveillance, and conclude
with a discussion of the approaches and solutions that only an engaged community
of professional geographers can propose.




5.2 HIPAA Legislation and Patient Privacy Protections


There have been several signiﬁcant legislative actions to protect individual privacy,
as it pertains to HIEs. First, the Privacy Rule in the Health Insurance Portability and
AccountabilityAct of 1996 (HIPAA) created new procedural requirements for the
use of protected health information (PHI) and deﬁ ned PHI more broadly than had
been done in the past [ 10 ,11]. Second, theAmerican Recovery and Reinvestment

Act of 2009 directed the new National Coordinator for Health Information
Technology to pay closer attention to both data access and data conﬁdentiality mat-
ters, as they relate to the HIEs [ 12]. Finally, the Patient Protection andAffordable
Care Act of 2010 directed the same ofﬁ ce to “develop national standards for the

management of data collected,” and “develop interoperability and security systems
for data management” [13 ].
   Among these, the one that bears the greatest impact on patient privacy protection
is HIPAA’s Privacy Rule, which went into full effect in 2003. The Privacy Rule
deﬁnes and protects PHI, which is any information that relates to the individual’s

past, present, or future physical or mental health or condition, the provision of
healthcare to that individual, or the payment for the provision of healthcare to the
individual. Simply put, this includes any information that identiﬁes an individual or
for which there is a reasonable basis to believe it can be used to identify an indi-
vidual.A list of common identiﬁers that are considered PHI is listed in Table 5.1 .

   While permissible uses and disclosures of PHI include those made for purposes
of treatment, payment and healthcare operations, reasonable care must be taken to
avoid disclosures. The U. S. Department of Health and Human Services’Ofﬁ ce of
Civil Rights (OCR) is responsible for enforcing HIPAA. OCR’s investigations are
complaint driven. In response to complaints received, OCR conducts an investigation

and may require corrective action and/or a resolution agreement, if a HIPAA
violation has occurred. OCR may impose civil monetary penalties and refer matters
to the US Department of Justice for criminal investigations.
52                   5   Data Privacy and Ethical Uses of Volunteered Geographic Information


  Table 5.1 18 identeirﬁs of protected health information, or PHI, in accordance with 45 CFR
164.514 a

 1. Names
 2. Geographic subdivisions smaller than a state (except the ﬁrst three digits of a zip code if the
 geographic unit formed by combining all zip codes with the same three initial digits contains

 more than 20,000 people and the initial three digits of a zip code for all such geographic units
 containing 20,000 or fewer people is changed to 000)
 3. All elements of dates (except year) for dates directly related to an individual, including birth
 date, admission date, discharge date, and date of death and all ages over 89 and all elements of

 dates (including year) indicative of such age (except that such ages and elements may be
 aggregated into a single category of age 90 or older)
 4. Telephone numbers
 5. Fax numbers

 6. Electronic mail addresses
 7. Social security numbers

 8. Medical record numbers
 9. Health plan beneﬁciary numbers
 10. Account numbers

 11. Certiﬁcate/license numbers
 12. Vehicle identieﬁrs and serial numbers, including license plate numbers

 13. Device identiﬁers and serial numbers
 14. Web Universal Resource Locators (URLs)
 15. Internet Protocol (IP) address numbers

 16. Biometric identiﬁers, including ﬁnger and voice prints
 17. Full face photographic images and any comparable images
 18. Any other unique identifying number, characteristic, or code (excluding a random identiﬁer

 code for the subject that is not related to or derived from any existing identiﬁer)
aPlease note that de-identiﬁed health information entails the removal of all of the above identiﬁers

as well as the absence of actual knowledge by the covered entity that the remaining information
could be used alone or in combination with other information to identify the individual


   In January 2013, HIPAA was updated to include the Security Rule and Breach
Notiﬁcation portions of the Health Information Technology for Economic and

Clinical Health (HITECH)Act. In these updates, the greatest changes relate to the
expansion of requirements to include business associates, as opposed to the covered

entities that were originally mentioned in the law. Additionally, the deﬁ           nition of
“signiﬁcant harm” to an individual in the analysis of a breach was updated to pro-
vide increased scrutiny to covered entities with the intent of disclosing more

breaches which had been previously gone unreported.As an example, an organiza-
tion previously needed to demonstrate that harm had occurred to prove a security

breach. Now, they must prove that harm had not occurred. Other changes include
the protection of PHI for 50 years after death, and the imposition of more severe
penalties for PHI violations [14 ].

   In addition, independent institutional review boards (IRBs) have been created to
protect patients’rights and risk from physical or psychological harm in research.

IRBs are independent ethics review committees which are formally designated to
5.3  Legal and Ethical Issues Concerning Volunteered Geographic Information       53


approve, monitor, and review biomedical and behavioral research involving humans.
They often perform some type of risk-beneﬁt analysis to determine whether or not
the proposed research should be conducted [ 15]. In the United States, regulations
from the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and Department of Health and

Human Services (Ofﬁce for Human Research Protections) have empowered IRBs to
approve, require modiﬁcations in planned research prior to approval, or disapprove
research. IRBs are responsible for critical oversight functions for research con-
ducted on human subjects that are “scientiﬁc,” “ethical,” and “regulatory” [16 ].



5.3       Legal and Ethical Issues Concerning Volunteered

       Geographic Information

According Dr. Francis Harvey, a noted critical geographer,VGI can be distinguished
from contributed geographic information (CGI) by determining whether the col-

lected geographic information was provided from a data producer who opted “in” to
contribute the data. For instance, geographic information is “volunteered,” if a geo-
tagged photograph or observational note was actively and willingly uploaded onto
OpenStreetMap (Fig. 5.2). On the other hand, geographic information is “contrib-
uted” if the data producer had an opportunity to opt “out” of the data production

process (as in a remotely sensing image used for surveillance) [17 ]. This difference
speaks to the importance of distinguishing crowdsourced information collected by
people actively deciding to collect data (and having some measure of control), from
crowdsourced data collected automatically or with a clear abrogation of possibili-
ties to inﬂuence the collection and reuse of the data.

   Regardless of whether the geographic information was volunteered or contrib-
uted, these issues of liability, privacy, and ethics are very relevant to disease sur-
veillance, especially when untrained citizens are contributing data to inform
public health. One of the most prominent uses of VGI in disease surveillance is
Google Flu Trends, which was developed in 2008 by Google and the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) [ 18]. Google Flu Trends relies on the data

mining records of ﬂ u-related search terms entered in Google’s Internet search
engine, and sophisticated computer simulations. Since its inception, estimates
from Google Flu Trends have closely matched the CDC’s own surveillance data
over time, often delivering them several days faster than the CDC surveillance
systems can. The success of Google Flu Trends has been so great that it has been

rolled out to 29 countries and extended to include surveillance for a second dis-
ease, dengue (Fig. 5.3 ).
   In recent years, however, Google Flu Trends has missed its intended forecasts.
Researchers speculate that these missed estimates may be due to widespread media
coverage of a particularly severe ﬂu season in one year, such as a declaration of a

public-health emergency by NewYork State. The proliferation of press reports on
the Internet may also have triggered many ﬂu-related searches by people who were
not ill [9 ].
54                  5  Data Privacy and Ethical Uses of Volunteered Geographic Information
































                                                                               , Accessed 17 Nov 2014)

















                                                                               http://www.openstreetmap.org/note/15014














                                                                                OpenStreetMap view of London (


                                                                                Fig. 5.2
5.3  Legal and Ethical Issues Concerning Volunteered Geographic Information               55

































                                                                                  , Accessed 17 Nov 2013)






                                                                                   utrends/de/#DE










                                                                                  http://www.google.org/ﬂ













                                                                                   Google Flu Trends in Germany (


                                                                                   Fig. 5.3
56                  5  Data Privacy and Ethical Uses of Volunteered Geographic Information


   Liability issues arising from data accuracy are also very important, especially
when there is a potential endangerment of life, as seen in the use of VGI in disease
surveillance applications [20 ,21]. Since the contributors of VGI often do not have

any formal training or expertise in mapping or geography, mistakes and errors may
exist in VGI-based disease surveillance services. For this reason, the contractual
relationship between theVGI website and its users must be posted in the “Terms of
Use” on the web page. For contributors, particular care must be exercised by not
promising any type of warranty for the data submitted. Doing so may expose and

heighten the risk of legal responsibility for any errors (intended or un-intended).
Also, contributors should not provide any indemniﬁcation for the data and informa-
tion submitted. This will avoid having to defend indemnity in the courts on behalf
of the VGI website.
   Furthermore, VGI service providers need to ensure that they do not engage in

negligent conduct and implement a secure process to validate volunteer contribu-
tions. Because it can be difﬁcult to determine whether a VGI website is a product,
service, or mere information, a VGI service may be liable in cases where accuracy
was promised and was breached, resulting in a causal link between VGI provider
and the loss suffered [22]. The exercise of due diligence from a reasonable person

is the common threshold test for this type of liability.
   In addition, there are many ethical and privacy issues involved with data mining
public records from the Internet for disease surveillance research. Some people par-
ticipating in health-related discussion forums have no problems with the constant
and uncontrolled collection of their personal information, while others feel that this

intrusion is similar to situations where governments have secretly collected infor-
mation about citizens [23 ,24]. Unfortunately, research usingVGI to uncover health
trends in public discussion forums are exempt from IRB applications because
“research involving the collection or study of existing data, documents, records,

pathological specimens, or diagnostic specimens, if these sources are publicly avail-
able” are exempt from IRB review [15].As a result, personal health information that
is volunteered and is geo-tagged by an Internet Protocol (IP) address is not pro-
tected by the independent ethics review committees that regularly review research
protocols involving human subjects.

   Furthermore, as crowdsourced geographic information becomes more prevalent
in certain parts of our society, more detailed data is constantly being collected from
smart phone users, unless the phones are turned off or the location services are dis-
abled. There are many examples of how crowdsourced locational data is collected,
often without the data producers’knowledge and frequently without information

about its reuses [25 –27]. For instance, according to a CNET news report, Microsoft
has collected spatial data on laptops, cell phones, and Wi-Fi devices and released
that information on the Internet [ 28]. In public health applications, the practice of
removing attribute data from a person’s geographic footprint and thereby only link-
ing things by geographic and temporal proximity should not be interpreted as an

adequate mode of protecting an individual’s privacy. Reverse geocoding, a process
of identifying a street address from a point on a map, allows for the idenctition of an
individual, as do time-stamped geographic data or travel paths [  29 –31]. In addition,
5.4  Collaborating Towards a Solution: New Use Cases for Volunteer Geographic…     57


methods have been developed to reverse identify the addresses of infected patients
via low-resolution images (e.g., 50 dots-per-inch and 1:100,000 scale) published in
medical journals [ 32]. Hence, crowdsourced geographic information plays an
important role in the ability of companies and government agencies to know and

predict people’s activities, and – to a certain extent – their health conditions.



5.4 Collaborating Towards a Solution: New Use Cases
       for Volunteer Geographic Information


At the beginning of this chapter, three important issues were raised concerning the
privacy, accuracy, and use of VGI in scientiﬁ c research. First, given the nature of
VGI (and CGI), how can personal privacy be safeguarded in a forum that is publicly
available, such as the Internet? Second, how can VGI be veriﬁed, as to its truth and

accuracy, especially in the context of public health disease surveillance? Finally,
how can VGI be used to supplement traditional sources of health information,
especially in the context of HIEs?
   These issues are most adequately addressed by collaborations across disciplines
and governing bodies. Several solutions are available in the broader realm of public

health and epidemiological research; however, they need to be adjusted to address
the special nature of geospatial data.Addressing personal privacy on the Internet is
a difﬁcult issue because, while it is true that the Internet is a public forum and there
is no true protection of privacy once VGI is posted there, a VGI-based disease sur-
veillance service could choose to exercise caution and responsibility when collect-

ing this information and separate the PHI from the medical records as the source of
data collection and perform the analysis on the de-identiﬁed records. This protocol
has been suggested for traditional, notiﬁ cation-based surveillance systems and
cancer registries, and the current generation of information technology does easily
support this type of architecture [33 ].

   Several algorithms have been developed to verifying the truthfulness and data
accuracy of VGI-based disease surveillance services. There are two fundamental
approaches to assessing the reliability of VGI. The ﬁ rst approach is the simplest,
whereby allVGI is assumed to be either entirely credible or not until it is conﬁrmed
or rejected by a subsequent report. In this approach, all data producers are treated
equally with respect to their prior knowledge/skills; and their reliability is assessed

by their peers through the creation of informal social networks of inﬂuence and trust
[34 ,35]. The second approach considers the skill set and prior credibility of the data
producer offering theVGI, and produces a rating or score of each contributor based
on these factors. In this approach, the reliability of theVGI is dependent on the prior
assessment of the data producer and previous VGI offered by this individual to the

system. If a number of prior contributions have been rejected, then the individual
tagged with a low reliability score that may result in the automatic rejection of any
subsequent contributions made (unless the contributions can be independently con-
ﬁrmed by a third party in the future). On the other hand, if the data producer has a
 58                   5  Data Privacy and Ethical Uses of Volunteered Geographic Information


 history of high quality submissions that are consistently conﬁ rmed, then he or she
 may be given a high credibility score, leading to an automatic acceptance of theVGI

 into the database [36 –38 ].
    In addition, as Dr. Francis Harvey has suggested, truth in labeling can be very
 helpful, as it relates to the provenance of VGI, in recording and making accessible

 characteristics of the collection, processing, and reuses of information to existing
 and potential data consumers.As part of provenance, drawing a distinction between
 CGI and VGI can be an important truth-in-labeling indicator for potential users

 about quality and potential biases [17 ].
    One of the greatest potential applications of VGI is to provide sensitive and

 timely surveillance data when reliable and consistent communications between
 health care providers and regional health authorities are not possible. VGI presents
 a viable approach to collect disease incidence data – or other data (e.g., climatic and

 environmental risks) that directly inﬂuences the prevalence of disease.VGI uses the
 local citizenry to collect surveillance information, thereby increasing the number of
 resources available to collect the data. If deployed correctly, it may not be necessary

 to dispatch health professionals to obtain the data directly, as in mass gathering.




    References


  1. Goodchild MF (2007) Citizens as voluntary sensors: spatial data infrastructure in the world of

     Web 2.0. Int J Spat Data Infrastruct Res 2:24–32
  2. Sui D, Elwood S, Goodchild MF (2013) Crowdsourcing geographic knowledge: volunteered
     geographic information in theory and practice. Springer, Berlin
G.oodchild MF, Glennon JA (2010) Crowdsourcing geographic information for disaster
     response: a research frontier. Int J Digit Earth 3(3):231–241
  4.Levental S (2012) A new geospatial services framework: how disaster preparedness efforts
     should integrate neogeography. J Map Geogr Lib 8(2):134–162

  5.The Economist (2010) Dicing with data. The Economist online, 20 May 2010. Available at
     http://www.economist.com/node/16163396. Accessed 10 Nov 2013
  6. Dunn C (2007) Participatory GIS – a people’s GIS? Prog Hum Geogr 31(5):616–637
  7. cDougall K (2009) Volunteered geographic information for building SI. In: Ostendorf B,
     Baldock P, Bruce D, Burdett M, Corcoran P (eds) Proceedings of the Surveying and Spatial
     Sciences Institute: biennial international conference, Adelaide, Australia 2009. Surveying and
     Spatial Sciences Institute, Hobart, pp 645–653

 8.lanagin AJ, Metzger MJ (2008) The credibility of volunteered geographic information.
     GeoJournal 72:137–148
   9. Lane J, Schur C (2010) Balancing access to health data and privacy: a review of the issues and
     approaches for the future. Health Serv Res 45(5 part 2):1456–1567
 10. Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996. Pub. L. 104–191 (Aug. 21, 1996).
  11. American Statistical Association Open Letter on Proposed Changes to CMS Part D Public Use
     Files, 17 September 2008. Available athttp://www.amstat.org/outreach/pdfs/CMSPartDPUF.

     pdf. Accessed 17 Nov 2013
   12.   Public Law 111–5 (2009) Available attp://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-111publ5/pdf/
     PLAW-111publ5.pdf  . Accessed 17 Nov 2013
   13.   PPACA Title XXXI, Section 3101
   14.   HITECH Act, 45 CFR Parts 160 and 164
    References                                                                                   59


 15P.rice PL (2012) Geography, me, and the IRB: from roadblock to resource. Prof Geogr

        64(1):34–42
    16. National Research Act of 1974, Title 45 CFR Part 46
    17. Harvey F (2013) To volunteer or to contribute locational information? Towards truth in label-
        ing for crowdsourced geographic information. In: Sui D, Elwood S, Goodchild MF (eds)

        Crowdsourcing geographic knowledge: volunteered geographic information in theory and
        practice. Springer, Berlin, pp 31–42
      18.  Google.org    Flu   Trends.   Available  htat://www.google.org/ﬂutrends/about/how.html.
        Accessed 17 Nov 2013

      19.   Butler D (2013) When Googleu w   gortonﬂg. Nat New 494:155–156
S0c.assa T (2013) Legal issues with volunteered geographic information. Can Geogr
        57(1):1–10
   21.Mooney P, Corcoran P, Ciepluch B (2013) The potential for using volunteered geographic

        information in pervasive health computing applications. J Ambient Intell Humaniz Comput
        4(6):731–745
   22.Chandler JA, Levitt K (2011) Spatial data quality: the duty to warn users of risks associated
        using spatial data. Alberta Law Rev 49(1):79–106

    23. Pew Research Center (2010) The future of online socializing. Available athttp://pewresearch.
        org/pubs/1652/social-relations-online-experts-predict-future Accessed 17 Nov 2013
   24.Kar B, Crowsey RC, Zale JJ (2013) The myth of location privacy in the United States: sur-
        veyed attitude versus current practices. Prof Geogr 65(1):47–64

    25. Acohido B (2011) Privacy implications of ubiquitous digital sensors. USA Today, 26 January
        2011, P1B
    26. Liptak A (2011) Court case asks if ‘Big Brother’is spelled GPS. The NewYork Times, online.
        Available at http://www.nytimes.com/2011/09/11/us/11gps.html. Accessed 17 Nov 2013

    27. National Research Council. (2007) Putting people on the map: protecting conﬁdentiality with
        linked social-spatial data. National Academy Press, Washington, DC
    28. McCullagh D (2011) Microsoft’s web map exposes phone, PC locations. CNET. Available at
        http://news.cnet.com/8301-31921_3-20085028-281/microsofts-web-map-exposes-phone-pc-

        locations/ Accessed 17 Nov 2013
    29. Brownstein J, Cassa C, Kohane I et al (2005) Reverse geocoding: concerns about patient con-
        ﬁdentiality in the display of geospatial health data. In: AMIA annual symposium proceedings,
        Washington, DC, p 905

   30.El Emam K, Brown A, AbdelMalik A et al (2010) A method for managing re-identiﬁ          cation
        risk from small geographic areas in Canada. BMC Med Inf Decis Mak 10:18
      31.   Chow TE, Lin Y, Chan WD (2011) The development of a web-based demographic data extrac-
        tion tool for population monitoring. Trans GIS 15(4):479–494

   32. Brownstein JS, Cassa CA, Kohane IS et al (2006) An unsupervised classiﬁ cation method for
        inferring original case locations from low-resolution disease maps. Int J Health Geogr 5:56.
        doi:10.1186/1476-072X-5-56
    33. Churches T (2003) A proposed architecture and method of operation for improving the protec-

        tion of privacy and conﬁdentiality in disease registers. BMC Med Res Methodol 3:1
    34. Bishr M, Kuhn W (2007) Geospatial information bottom-up: a matter of trust and semantics.
        In: Fabrikant SI, Wachowicz M (eds) Lecture notes in geoinformation and cartography.
        Springer, Berlin, pp 365–387. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-72385-1_22

    35. Bishr M, Mantelas L (2008) A trust and reputation model for ﬁ ltering and classifying knowl-
        edge about urban growth. GeoJournal 72(3):229–237. doi:  10.1007/s10708-008-9182-4
    36. Crosetto M (2001) Uncertainty and sensitivity analysis: tools for GIS-based model implemen-
        tation. Int J Geogr Inf Sci 15(5):415–437. doi:0.1080/13658810110053125

    37. Conati C (2004) How to evaluate models of user affect? In: André E, Dybkjær L, Minker W,
        Heisterkamp P (eds) Affective dialogue systems, vol 3068. Springer, Berlin, pp 288–300.
        doi:10.1007/978-3-540-24842- 2_30
    38. Langley S, Messina J, Grady S (2013) Utilizing volunteered information for infectious disease
        surveillance. Int J Appl Geospatial Res 4(2):54–70