                                                                                    377


EVOLUTION OF CROWDSOURCING: Potential Data
Protection, Privacy and Security Concerns under the New

Media Age


EVOLUTION DEL CROWDSOURCING: Protección de Datos,

Privacidad y Seguridad en el marco de la sociedad de la información

                                                    1
                                  Buddhadeb Halder


Artigo recebido em 22 abr. 2014 e aceito em 02 jun. 2014.



Abstract

Over the last few years, crowdsourcing have expanded rapidly allowing citizens to connect
with each other, governments to connect with common mass, to coordinate disaster
response work, to map political conflicts, acquiring information quickly and participating in

issues that affect day-to-day life of citizens. This paper aims to provide a basic
understanding on crowdsourcing, while it illustrates the use of different types and methods,
advantages and disadvantages of crowdsourcing. This paper also provides a brief analysis
on potential Data Protection, Privacy and Security concerns under the New Media Age.

Lastly, this paper proposes future works to avoid some disadvantages of crowdsourcing
process and to protect data, privacy and security of end users.

Keywords
Crowdsourcing. Definition and Evolution. Typology. Security. Privacy. Ethical and Legal Aspects.
New Media Age.






1Master in Human Rights from Calcutta University, Master in Human Rights Practice under Erasmus Mundus
   Programme under University of Gothenburg, Roehampton University and University of Tromsø. Doing PhD under
   Erasmus Mundus Joint International Doctoral (Ph.D) Degree in Law, Science and Technology (LAST-JD) at
   Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona (UAB). Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain. E-mail: buddhadeb.halder@unibo.it.
Democracia Digital e Governo Eletrônico, Florianópolis, n° 10, p. 377-393, 2014.
                                                                                             378

Resumen


En los últimos años, el crowdsourcing ha conocido una rápida expansión, permitiendo que
los ciudadanos se conecten unos con otros y que los gobiernos conecten con sus
ciudadanos. Esto ha permitido la coordinación de las respuestas a los desastres naturales, el

mapeo de los conflictos políticos, la adquisición de información de forma rápida y la
participación en los asuntos que afectan el día a día de la vida de los ciudadanos. Este
artículo tiene como objetivo proporcionar un conocimiento básico sobre crowdsourcing,

mostrando el uso de sus diferentes tipos y métodos, ventajas y desventajas. Este artículo
también proporciona un breve análisis sobre Protección de Datos, Privacidad y Seguridad
en el marco de la sociedad de la información. Por último, propone evitar algunos
inconvenientes del proceso de crowdsourcing para proteger los datos, la privacidad y la

seguridad de los usuarios finales.

Palabras clave
Crowdsourcing. Definición y evolución. Tipología. Seguridad. Privacidad. Aspectos éticos y legales.
Sociedad de la información. Marco de Comunicación.



1     Introduction

Over the last few years, the term “crowdsourcing” has become really well known to the

interdisciplinary research community. What is ‘crowdsourcing’ all about? The term
"crowdsourcing" is the combination of two words “crowd” and “outsourcing” coined by
Jeff Howe and published in a June 2006 Wired magazine article “The Rise of Crowdsourcing”
                                                                     2
(HOWE, 2006b). For the first time, the Oxford English Dictionary , in its June 2013 edition
included the word ‘crowdsourcing’ and defines as ‘Practice of obtaining information or
sources by soliciting input from a large number of people’.             3 However, I define
‘crowdsourcing’ as ‘the process of finding needed information and service for a common

goal from a large number of people’. Different types of crowdsourcing have expanded
rapidly allowing citizens to connect with each other, governments to connect with
common mass, acquiring information quickly and participating in issues that affect citizens.




2Available at: <http://public.oed.com/the-oed-today/recent-updates-to-the-oed/june-2013-update/a-heads-up-for-the-
3   june-2013-oed-release/>. Accessed on: 26 nov. 2013.
   Available at: <http://www.senatehouselibrary.ac.uk/2013/07/24/crowdsourcing-and-history-or-crowdsourcing-
    history/>. Accessed on: 26 nov. 2013.

Democracia Digital e Governo Eletrônico, Florianópolis, n° 10, p. 377-393, 2014.
                                                                                         379


The increased use of crowdsourcing platforms and the positive development of
crowdsourcing help common people to become more active and informed citizens.

There are several examples of crowdsourcing initiatives across various fields such as art
(CASAL, 2011), business (BELLEFLAMME; LAMBERT; SCHWIENBACHER, 2010),
governance (BOMMERT, 2010), journalism (FITT, 2011) and medicine (NORMAN et. al,

2011). The increased use of crowdsourcing platforms and the positive development of
crowdsourcing help common people to become more active and informed citizens.
Crowdsourcing methods provide a low cost and scalable way to access ideas that might be
difficult or expensive to obtain internally (COX, 2011). There are several crowdsourcing

platforms available and usually they are open sourced digital platforms. With the help of
those platforms government, crisis response teams, NGOs, business organisations and
other individuals can collect data- through the information that the ‘crowd’ i.e. common
mass share- and use those data to develop new policies, innovative idea for new products,
help victims of natural calamities to find shelters, medicines and other emergency needs,

solve minor technical problems, send collective voice to the authority etc. Apart from
these, there are other crowdsourcing initiatives to raise funds for social causes, collect
money to set up small business, asking for little money for education or for an innovative
project.



2     The development of crowdsourcing

The term “crowdsourcing” was coined in 2006, but the process of crowdsourcing was
applied as early as 1714. Since then, crowdsourcing has helped creating some of the world's

greatest inventions and biggest brands. This part of the paper outlines the history of
crowdsourcing and highlights some historical and recent examples that occurred before
and after the term ‘crowdsourcing’ existed. The following examples illustrate how different
crowdsourcing processes have been used to invent; to design; to raise funds; to govern and
to get crisis update from the ground.


The fitht known example of application of ‘crowdsourcing’ concept has found in Britain in
the 18 century. The British Government offered a Longitude Prize (WEPSTER, 2010) of
£20,000 for a simple and practical method of calculating a ship’s longitude in 1714. It was
finally awarded in 1765 to John Harrison for his chronometer. The other example of
crowdsourcing initiative was in the same century in 1783 in France. The King Louis XVI of


4More information available at <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Longitude_prize>. Accessed on: 17 nov. 2013.

Democracia Digital e Governo Eletrônico, Florianópolis, n° 10, p. 377-393, 2014.
                                                                                                  380


France offered a prize for producing alkali from sea salt and Nicholas Leblance took the
prize in 1791 (MCGRAYNE, 2001). In the year of 1795, the French government offered a
12000 franc prize to anyone who could devise a cheap and effective method of preserving

large amounts of food.

In 1810, French confectioner Nicolas Appert published an article on food preservation and

the French emperor Napoléon awarded the 12,000-franc prize to thcolas Appert for his
prize-winning essay (KATZ, 2003). Again in late 19               century the France government
offered a prize to anyone who could make a satisfactory substitute for butter, suitable for

use by the armed forces and the lower classes. In 1869, French chemist Hippolyte Mège-
Mouriès  5 had patented a substance he called ‘oleomargarine’ and later it became known as
‘Margarine’. Another important example of crowdsourcing initiative in late 19           th century is

related to Oxford English Dictionary (OED). This initiative was taken in 1884. The OED
used around 800 volunteer readers assigned to particular books, copying passages
                                                6
illustrating word usage onto quotation slips.

In 18  th and 19   th century, crowdsourcing initiatives were taken mainly for scientific
innovation and were concentrated in Europe only. However, in the 20                      th  century,

crowdsourcing initiatives have been taken for different fields such as, art and culture,
scientific innovation, social movement, not-for-profit purpose etc and reached all over the
                                                    7
world. In 1916, the Planters Peanuts contest announced to develop its logo. In 1936,
Toyota announced a logo contest to redesign its logo. Toyota Company received 27,000
entries and the winning logo was the three Japanese katakana letters for “Toyoda” in a

circle, which was later modified by Risaburo Toyoda to “Toyota”. In 1938, the USA
started the Mathematical Tables Project in which they engaged 450 out of work clerks in
tabulating higher mathematical functions and the “Handbook of Mathematical Functions”

was published (GRIER, 1997). A United Kingdom social research organisation Mass-
Observation was founded in 1937. It aimed to record everyday life in Britain through a

panel of around 500 untrained volunteer observers who either maintained diaries or replied
to open-ended questionnaires. Mass-Observation also paid investigators to anonymously
record people’s conversation and behavior at work, on the street and at various public
                                                                               8
occasions including public meetings and sporting and religious events. This project ended


5For details visit at <http://www.imace.org/about-margarine/history/>. Accessed on 15 nov. 2013.
6 More information available at <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oxford_English_Dictionary> and also available at
    <http://memeburn.com/2011/09/9-examples-of-crowdsourcing-before-
    %E2%80%98crowdsourcing%E2%80%99-existed/>. Both Accessed on: 17 nov. 2013.
7For details visit at <http://www.ideafinder.com/history/inventions/plantnuts.htm>. Accessed on: 17 nov. 2013.
8http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mass_Observation

Democracia Digital e Governo Eletrônico, Florianópolis, n° 10, p. 377-393, 2014.
                                                                                                        381


in 1960s but was revived in 1981. The nature of this particular crowdsourcing project

clearly illustrates it as a surveillance project. Thus, in that context, the Mass Observation
project was the first crowdsourced project for mass surveillance. In 1957, the Australian
                                                                                       9
government arranged a design competition for the Sydney Opera House. A different type
of crowdsourcing initiative has been traced in Brazil in 1960s. For the first time in the

history of human empowerment, the Brazilian theatre practitioner Augusto Boal used a
technique for audience to become a part of the drama. According to this technique, the

actors will stop the play in the middle of a performance and ask the audience to continue
the performance. This example could also be identified as the first example of active

participation for a popular democratic practice. This theatrical practice is known as the
‘Theatre of the Oppressed’.      10 The publication of the travel guide Lonely Planet in 1981   11

was the contribution of independent travelers (LISLE, 2006). The Hollywood Stock
Exchange founded in 1996 to buy and sell prediction shares of movies, actors, directors
                                                                               13
and film-related options. In 1997, the British rock band Marillion raised $60,000 online
from fans to fund their U.S. tour. The first major online service marketplace has been
                       14                                          15
launched by Elance in 1999 (KOBA, 2013). JustGiving - the online fundraising platform
for charities has been launched in 2000. Also a fan-funding platform named ArtistShare                    16

has been launched in the same year (DAWSON; BYNGHALL, 2011).

The Wikipedia launched in 2001. Since then, different companies, brand and institutions
                                                                      17
have implemented more than 200 crowdsourcing projects. It has also been used for the
NGO sector. For example, in online micro-finance platform such as www.kiva.org;

http://hopemob.org/ that brings caring strangers together to create sudden, yet organized
relief and hope all over the world; Violence Against Women Monitoring Map in

Bangladesh 2011- www.bijoya.org etc; in emergency response work such as- crisis response
work for Haiti earthquake, 2010; Uttarakhand Flood Crisis mapping 2013, Typhoon

Haiyan in Phillippines 2013 etc. Also during the Hurricane Sandy in 2012, Airbnb


9
 See details at http://australia.gov.au/about-australia/australian-story/sydney-opera-house. Accessed on: 15 nov. 2013.
10Visit http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Theatre_of_the_Oppressed#Simultaneous_dramaturgy. Accessed on: 21 nov. 2013.
11http://www.lonelyplanet.com/
12http://www.hsx.com
13http://www.marillion.com/
14https://www.elance.com/
15
16http://www.justgiving.com/
  https://www.artistshare.com
17Some examples are Acrobat.com Ideas, Amazon Mechanical Turk, BMW Virtual Innovation Agency, BMW Customer
    Innovation Lab, BLDG 2.0, Cisco iPrize, Dell IdeaStrom, Innovate with Kraft, Dewmocracy, My Starbucks Idea,
    Nokia Concept Lounge, Oracle Mix, Hewlett-Packard IT Resource Center, LG Design the Future, Intel/ASUS
    WePC, Call for investments in Film Industry, India).


Democracia Digital e Governo Eletrônico, Florianópolis, n° 10, p. 377-393, 2014.
                                                                                     382


(https://www.airbnb.com/sandy) provided a platform to connect those who are eager to
offer free housing to those who have been displaced by the storm. Crowdsourcing process
has been used in political crisis response namely, monitoring post-election violence in Kenya in
2007, Syria Tracker (https://syriatracker.crowdmap.com/) is a platform to report the
incidents  of   missing,   killed, arrested,  eyewitness;   Libya   Crisis  Map    2011
                                                                              18
(http://libyacrisismap.net/) etc. while it has been used in good governance initiatives. Another
important use of crowdsourcing process is in the fields of law or policy-making, such as
Constitution amendment in Iceland 2011; Criminal Law amendment in India 2013,
Drafting a new UK Constitution, 2013 etc. Wikipedia.org has named more than hundred

initiatives that have been taken only in last couple of years. Recently, a newly formed
political party in India- Aam Admi Party (AAP) has raised 3.3 million USD for their voting
campaign expenses. The AAP has also managed to gather over 15000 volunteers to work
for the election in Delhi state of India.



3     Definitions, methods and different domains of crowdsourcing

There are numbers of crowdsourcing definitions have been found in the literature. Estelles-
Arolas    &    Gonzalez-Ladron-de-Guevara       (ESTELLÉS-AROLAS;         GONZÁLEZ
LADRÓN-DE-GUEVARA, 2012) found 40 different definitions of crowdsourcing and

after considering some specific aspects of the crowd, the initiator and the underlying
process proposed an integrated definition of crowdsourcing. Jeff Howe, who coined the
terms ‘crowdsourcing’ in 2006, describes that ‘crowdsourcing’ is the combination of
‘crowd’ and ‘outsourcing’. He defines crowdsourcing as,

                       [....] the act of taking a job traditionally performed by a designated agent (usually an
                       employee) and outsourcing it to an undefined, generally large group of people in the
                       form of an open call (HOWE, 2006a).

For the first time, the Oxford English Dictionary, in its June 2013 edition included the word
‘crowdsourcing’. Several authors and experts e.g. Howe, Brabham, Kleeman et al., Grier,

Vukovic, and Whitla have defined the term ‘crowdsourcing’ more than once in different
articles published between 2006 and 2011. After analysing 40 different definitions, and after
considering some specific aspects of the crowd, the initiator and the underlying process
Estelles-Arolas & Gonzalez-Ladron-de-Guevara (ESTELLÉS-AROLAS; GONZÁLEZ

LADRÓN-DE-GUEVARA,             2012)  have    proposed   an   integrated  definition  of
crowdsourcing. However, this researcher finds the definition has a limitation. This

18For example, e-Purjee service, Bangladesh; RapidSMS, Ethiopia; MedAfrica; JobMatch.

Democracia Digital e Governo Eletrônico, Florianópolis, n° 10, p. 377-393, 2014.
                                                                                                383


researcher does not consider that crowdsourcing is just an online activity but an offline
activity as well. Thus, very simply this researcher defines ‘crowdsourcing’ as the process of

finding needed information and service for a common goal from a large number of people.
In De Vreede et al. (2013), Triparna de Vreede and others have rightly identified some
confusions in identifying which applications are crowdsourcing and which are not ;               19

whether Web 2.0 and other social networking are crowdsourcing platforms and whether
‘user innovation’ is corwdsourcing. However, Peter van der Windt describes ‘user
innovation’ as ‘Crowdseeding’ and not ‘Crowdsourcing’ (WINDT, 2011).


Jeff Howe- the expert who coined the term ‘crowdsourcing’ has pointed out some possible
categories of web-based crowdsourcing that can be used well in the business world. Some
of these crowdsourcing initiatives include crowdfunding, wisdom of the crowd, creative
                                                                                20
crowdsourcing, crowdvoting, microwork, and inducement prize contests.             However, these
categories may not be the complete list of different types of crowdsourcing (HOWE,
2008). To perform different types of tasks, people use other ways of crowdsouring as well.

Henk van Ess explains,

                          [....]Crowdsourcing is exploiting nice people…the crowdsourced problem can be huge
                          (epic tasks like finding alien life or mapping earthquake zones) or very small ('where can I
                          skate safely?'). Some examples of successful crowdsourcing themes are problems that bug
                          people, things that make people feel good about themselves, projects that tap into niche
                          knowledge of proud experts, subjects that people find sympathetic or any form of
                          injustice (ESS, 2010).

In his book ‘Crowdsourcing for Dummies’, David Alan Grier identifies five major forms of
crowdsourcing i.e. Crowdcontests, Macrotasks, Microtasks, Crowdfunding, Self-organised

Crowds. Each form involves a crowdsourcer or manager, a crowdmarket and a crowd of
people. By choosing the right form of crowdsourcing, someone can manage huge jobs with
thousands of workers or do small jobs that require just a single person. Someone can create

jobs that he can carefully monitor and control, or he can let the crowd organise itself and
decide how it should do the work (GRIER, 2013). Daren C. Brabham, in his book,
Crowdsourcing, published in 2013 puts forth a problem-based typology of crowdsourcing

approaches (BRABHAM, 2013). These four problem-based typologies are i). Knowledge
Discovery and Management; ii). Distributed Human Intelligence Tasking; iii). Broadcast
Search and iv). Peer-Vetted Creative Production.




19For example, Huberman et al. (2009 apud De Vreede et al., 2013) consider YouTube as crowdsourcing, while Kleeman
    et al. (2008, De Vreede et al., 2013) do not consider YouTube as crowdsourcing platform.
20http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Crowdsourcing

Democracia Digital e Governo Eletrônico, Florianópolis, n° 10, p. 377-393, 2014.
                                                                                        384


Marta Poblet, Esteban García-Cuesta, and Pompeu Casanovas proposed four different
types of ‘crowdsourcing roles’ based on two variables:     21 a. low/high involvement of
crowdsourced agents on processing the data and b. passive/active participation of

crowdsourced agents. They have identified four categories i.e. Crowds as sensors, Crowds
as social computers, Crowds as reporters and Crowds as microtaskers (POBLET;
GARCIA-CUESTA; CASANOVAS 2013).

As the definition of crowdsourcing by Jeff Howe (HOWE, 2006a) captures the most
important characteristics of crowdsourcing i.e. a crowdsourcing initiative should have the

following three elements: (1) Users are producers, not only consumers; (2) The number of
participants is undefined and (3) Users’ contributions are towards completing a specific
task. De Vreede et al. (2013) differentiate three sub-crowdsourcing models - virtual labor
marketplace, closed collaboration, and open collaboration. After analyzing several

definitions of crowdsourcing, Hetmank has identified four components (i.e. user
management, task management, contribution management, and workflow management) of
crowdscourcing (HETMANK, 2013). Every crowdsourcing component has several
functions like register user, evaluate user, design task, enable coordination etc.    Thus,

experts have proposed different types of crowdsourcing. However, based on the intention
of the crowdsourcing coordinator, this researcher proposes a further division of
crowdsourcing: i) Crowdsourcing for Crisis Response Management: (Natural crisis / Man-
made crisis); ii) Crowdsourcing for Public Governance; iii) Crowdsourcing for Business; iv)
Crowdsourcing for Innovation / Contest; v) Crowdsourcing for Opinion gathering i.e.

Opinion poll etc.; vi) Crowdsourcing for Fund Collection i.e. Crowdfunding and vii)
Crowdsourcing for general purpose.

The use of crowdsourcing in different domains not only makes it possible to mine,
aggregate and classify data but also helps in preparedness to face a particular situation,

response during the situation and recovery after the situation. Crowdsourcing initiators can
connect individuals and communities to gather data or to complete one or a set of easy
tasks, such as measurements, identifying disaster prone areas or to guide someone who is in
need etc. Crowdsourcing process allows individuals and organizations take part in several

types of initiatives. Out of different crowdsourcing domains (e.g. art, business, political,
scientific research, governance, health service, software development, and natural disaster
related etc.), contributors to the political crowdsourcing initiatives are most vulnerable to
the security and privacy threat.   Crowdsourcing platforms allow common citizens and


2They have proposed in their paper titled Crowdsourcing Tools for Disaster Management: A Review of Platforms and
    Methods. The article has been shared with the author in October 2013.

Democracia Digital e Governo Eletrônico, Florianópolis, n° 10, p. 377-393, 2014.
                                                                                       385

organizations to install, deploy, and manage crowdsourcing platforms in response to social
issue, health issue and sudden outburst emergencies ranging from natural disasters, to the
political conflict in any geographical region. They can also communicate with other
crowdsourcing initiators with whom they can share different outcomes on similar issues.

Another option can also work the other way round: experts can contribute their expertise
to a particular problem.

To further improve the understanding of crowdsourcing, the attention has been drawn on
some main domains of crowdsourcing. As a result from the literature review, the researcher
identifies four main areas of crowdsourcing, i.e. i) Art (Design competition, literature
competition etc); ii) Science (Scientific Innovation); iii) Finance (Crowdfunding for social

causes, business / investment) and iv) Social science (Opinion gathering, Opinion Poll etc),
while every main area has several sub-areas or sub-domains e.g. design / logo contest,
scientific innovation, crowd-investment, crowdfunding, crisis response etc.

A thorough analysis has been carried out on i). Seventeen crowdsourcing communities,
tools and platforms that contributes to the crisis response management work (i.e. Ushahidi,
SwiftRiver, Crowdmap, Eden–Sahana, PyBossa, CrisisTracker, OpenIR, ArcGIS, Recovers,

PADDDtracker.org, Google Crisis Map, GeoChat, Souktel, InaSAFE, Geofeedia, Geo-
pictures and CrisisCommons); ii). Three crowdsourcing innovation challenges platforms
e.g. Knight Foundations Challenges; MIT IDEAS Global Challenge and Mass Challenge
that are being used to find innovative ideas or develop innovative tools to tackle different
social issues or empower the mankind and lastly iii). Four crowdsourcing platforms used
for Miscellaneous Purposes e.g. InnoCentive; Innoget; Inpama and SolutionXchange.



4     Pros and cons of crowdsourcing

As it is proved that crowdsourcing process brings some real advantages to business
organisations, NGOs, governments and individuals to complete a range of tasks nicely. It
also helps to attain the best job with affordable price. Some important reasons for
attraction of using crowdsourcing are to have better solutions in terms of price, product

and quality. For business organisations, ‘it has been fairly lower price, compared to the
price for hiring a dedicated professional. Also the best thing with the low price is the high
number of people who are ready to work for you anytime’ (STEVENS, 2011). For the not-
for-profit sector, crowdsourcing has been absolutely the best option to engage common
people. It has been used successfully in crisis management - either man-made or natural;
helping victims of natural crisis to find a safe place (ROBERT, 2011). It is a great way to


Democracia Digital e Governo Eletrônico, Florianópolis, n° 10, p. 377-393, 2014.
                                                                                           386


engage the community and to gather the accurate real-time information from the ground.
Thus, it helps to manage any crisis properly and promptly. Crowdsourcing has also been
used in public governance. Crowdsourcing is also very convenience in gathering public
opinion to amend laws e.g. in Iceland in 2011 and in India in 2013 (HALDER, 2013),
informing citizens about a potential storm or helping poor farmers to find the best market

to sell the products (FISHER, 2012) etc. Like other professionals, health professionals also
are using crowdsourcing as a faster alternative to traditional methods for predicting and
monitoring infectious disease outbreaks. For example, in Haiti in 2010, informal sources
like groups discussions in social media including facebook and twitter revealed a cholera

outbreak’s in the country two weeks before the health ministry issued its report on the
cholera situation (CHUNARA; ANDREWS; BROWNSTEIN, 2012).

However, there are disadvantages of crowdsourcing as well. Interestingly in the business
sector, the main disadvantages mirror the main advantages: cheap labour means less
credible output, compared to professionals. Sometimes, the issue of management become

more crucial. In most cases, the initiator of a crowdsourcing project has to manage a large
scale of workers, which pretty much waste more of his time for management instead of
solution. Also it is difficult for collaboration between old and new crowd members as they
compete with each other. Sometimes crowd members do not take their job so seriously. So,
for all these reasons, crowdsourcing could not be the best option for a branded business

organisation. In the context of not-for-profit initiative, disadvantages 22e more crucial.
Governments, different security agencies, multinational corporations       and also terrorist
organizations are able to virtually spying on any person if they wish to. Especially in the
context of ‘political crisis’ (e.g. Crisis in Libya and Crisis in Syria etc.) governments can

avail GPS / GPRS- based data provided by citizens and misuse those to oppress
oppositions. Using crowdsourcing in public governance is a potential threat to the privacy
and protection of personal and sensitive data of users. As millions of data can easily be
gathered, governments and others could have very detailed information of who we are, our
mobile numbers, IP address of our computers, geographical location etc. Sometimes secret

agencies collect different types of information using crowdsourcing method and they can
easily guess what type of person we are. This assumption can lead a problem if they are
used to target on the ground of assumed health status, age, gender, race, religion, political
ideology, sexual orientation, etc. The situation gets even more serious when governments,

with the help of their ‘muscle power’ want to gain access to this personal and sensitive
personal information and other data with the intent to dominate over opposition voices.
Sometimes governments itself initiate collecting data using different crowdsourcing means

22See the news NDTV (2012).

Democracia Digital e Governo Eletrônico, Florianópolis, n° 10, p. 377-393, 2014.
                                                                                        387

to oppress those individuals or groups who are against governments (ACCESS, 2013).

Thus, the contributors of crowdsourcing initiatives become potential victims of human
rights violations by the secret agents of governments, multinational companies or even by
oppositions or terrorist organizations sometimes.


5     Legal and ethical aspects involved in privacy, security and data

        protection issues in crowdsourcing

In the context of political crowdsourcing, the contributors reporting on abuses or speaking
out against these forces have found themselves targeted for attack by the forces themselves
or their proxies - with consequences ranging from harassment to imprisonment and death
(CHAMALES; BAKER, 2011). For example, during the election monitoring effort of

Ushahidi in Egypt encountered regular harassment by members of Egyptian Security
Services (STECKLOW; SONNE; BRADLEY, 2011). It has also been noted that the
volunteers with fair local knowledge have left the crisis mapping work for Libya in 2011, as
they are likely to be the most sensitive to the possible security concerns (MORROWS et al,
2011). The ‘Libya Crisis Map’ was private initiative. When the United Nations Office for

the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (UN OCHA) decided to make the map public,
every Libyan volunteer left (ROBERT, 2011). This fact of driving away the most important
members in the Libya Crisis Map initiative has also raised the question of proper
coordination along with the security and privacy concerns of using the Ushahidi
crowdsourcing software. The privacy issue in the context of disaster response

crowdsourcing initiatives is not really potential threats to life of the contributors. Here, the
privacy issue is very much linked with personal data of individuals. Not all contributors
want to publicize their mobile number, name, sex, place etc. During the Haiti earthquake
all contributors said to have used the messages would have been able to access them
through private channels. Partners in this initiative did not have permission to publish the

messages received in the emergency mobile number 4636 on a public-facing map (by their
own conditions for publication). This action clearly resulted the privacy breach. Such type
of privacy breach in a more high-risk conflict situation would have serious consequences
for those contributors whose identities were exposed (ROBERT, 2011). The ‘Grand
Round Table’ - an online platform - is being used to find possible help from a secure,

intimate group of colleagues in health service sector. In this platform physicians can post
difficult cases to seek help. Sometimes, it is being used for diagnosis and medical treatment.


23
  More information available at <http://www.grandroundtable.com/>. Accessed on: 23 nov. 2013.
Democracia Digital e Governo Eletrônico, Florianópolis, n° 10, p. 377-393, 2014.
                                                                                              388

                       24
Medical transcription process based on the crowdsourcing methods has created a wider
base for medical transcriptionists who can be trained at home and online, and, ultimately,
perform the work on a more cost-effective basis (STROHMEYER, 2013). Another
                                                         25
mobile-based crowdsourcing platform, ‘MedAfrica             mobile application’ is a Medical
Services Content Platform (MSCP) that seeks to create health awareness among citizens
from the comfort of their mobile phones. This extraordinary mobile system seeks to

increase interactions and purposeful engagements between health practitioners and
common people of their services (WORLD BANK, 2012). Generally, service users are a
bit reluctant to share their private information e.g. name of diseases, sex, age etc. in a public

forum.    In terms of mobile-based crowdsourcing health service platforms, the biggest
privacy concern with the use of cell phones in healthcare is lost or stolen phones that
contain unencrypted patient data (GALLAGHER, 2013). Even the World Bank has

identified that ‘the health sector remains both complex and challenging’ and the ‘Privacy
and security concerns’ is one of ‘the most relevant challenges to the greater uptake of
mobile-based health service (WORLD BANK, 2012). Contributors in any crowdsourcing

initiatives would look for high level of privacy, security, anonymity and guarantee for data
protection (KARNIN; WALACH; DRORY, 2010). Unfortunately, not all crowdsourcing
platforms could provide the same but high level of security, privacy and private data
protection. These three aspects of crowdsourcing are really vital in making sure the security

of contributors. These are also important in terms of security information that integrated
with different crowdsourcing platforms.

In spite of different crowdsourcing systems, platforms and the method of interaction there
may be some level of security and privacy risk linked with contributors. In one hand, there

are some platforms that facilitate anonymous contributions that may pose low risk, and in
the other sending various levels of personally identical information that may pose higher
risk to contributors. Similarly, opportunistic systems may pose a high level of security risk

than participatory systems where users manually control data collection (WANG;                  26
HUANG; LOUIS, 2013). The Ushahidi platform deployed in Haiti by the Fletcher team
had the potential to provide hyper local information on the security situation through the

population but did not capture enough reports with specific information to make better
decision (HEINZELMAN; WATERS, 2010). In the age of 3-G phones, citizens have
further opportunity to participate in crowdsourcing process- not only because of their


24A process where written records and notes are translated into an electronic form, entered into a database, and used in
    the wider-spread arena of documenting the occurrence and frequency of specific illnesses.
25More information available at <http://medafrica.org>. Accessed on: 23 nov. 2013.
26To know more about the Fletcher team, please check <http://blog.ushahidi.com/2010/01/18/ushahidi-fletcher-
    situation-room-update/>. Accessed on: 29 nov. 2013.

Democracia Digital e Governo Eletrônico, Florianópolis, n° 10, p. 377-393, 2014.
                                                                                        389

portability and easy access to the Internet but also because of other functionalities like GPS
/ GPRS, cameras, and accelerometers etc attached with 3-G phones or smart phones

(WILLIAM, 2011). While all these functionalities and other 3-G mobile applications are
being considered as highly productive in different context, they may also expose users to
latest types of security and privacy concerns. In such circumstances, the World Bank
observes, ‘citizens often express concern about the security of their private and confidential
information, possible surveillance, and anonymity’. In the report it suggests, ‘without
strong protection or the quick resolution of any breach, citizens will be wary of sharing

their information with the government, and efforts to connect and interact would quickly
be undermined’ (WORLD BANK, 2012, p. 99).

Recent emergence of ICTs, some platforms including social media networks and other web
2.0 tools have changed the perception about privacy and it is becoming increasingly
confusing (GRUBMÜLLER; GÖTSCH; KRIEGER, 2013). It looks that users really do
not care about to sharing personal information about him / herself, about one’s friends or
networks in digital environments. Sometimes it becomes really confusing for the user to

distinguish between what is public and what is private (OMAND, 2012). Users act in the
same way when it comes contributing in crowdsourcing initiatives. Even sometimes some
energetic contributors become desperate to share confidential, sensitive and personal
information in crowdsourcing initiatives. In the crowdsourcing process all data received
from contributors store on a centralized server and ‘storing the preference information on

a centralized server can expose the users to security and privacy breaches, and in any case
requires a great deal of trust’ (TOCH, 2012). Despite the potential use of mobile or web
based crowdsourcing platform for natural disaster, conflict resolution, health and diseases
related issues, experts say they worry about the added risks of security breaches, privacy
violations and other concerns that come with the increasing use of different crowdsourcing
processes.

The issue of data protection in crowdsourcing initiatives is very important. Starting from
general crowdsourcing to business crowdsourcing; from disaster response work to political

conflict response work; from campaigning work to research (EKINS; WILLIAMS, 2010) -
in every crowdsourcing initiatives, data protection is the key. From the relational
perspective, privacy and security, both are closely linked with data protection. As the scope
of crowdsourcing is becoming wider, people are using it for different purpose. In the
context of crowdsourcing efforts for pharmaceutical research, people need to be aware of

some challenges like tissue handling (VAN, 2008), handling patients of infectious diseases
with rare etc. The International Organization for Migration has developed 13 data
protection principles which are: 1. Lawful & Fair Collection, 2. Specified and Legitimate


Democracia Digital e Governo Eletrônico, Florianópolis, n° 10, p. 377-393, 2014.
                                                                                      390

Purpose, 3. Data quality, 4. Consent, 5. Transfer to Third Parties, 6. Confidentiality, 7.
Access and Transparency, 8. Data Security, 9. Retention of Personal Data, 10. Application
of the Principles, 11. Ownership of Personal Data, 12. Oversight, Compliance & Internal
Remedies and 13. Exceptions (MARTENS, 2010, p. 11-12).


However all these principles cannot be applicable in crowdsourcing process. For example,
the first principle states, “Personal data must be obtained by lawful and fair means with the
knowledge or consent of the data subject.” “What does this mean when the data is self-
generated and voluntarily placed in the public domain? This question also applies to a
number of other principles including “Consent” and “Confidentiality” (MEIER, 2012).
Thus, from the above-analysis, it is clear that there is a need for some relevant data

protection principles especially for ‘New Media’ as the character of crowdsourced dataset is
not similar to other types of dataset those do not necessarily fall under ‘New Media’ dataset
category.


6     Conclusion and future work

The implication of crowdsourcing has been so far positive for the society. No serious

disadvantages that originated from crowdsourcing have been identified yet. However, the
recent disclosures by NSA contractor Edward Snowden established the fact that the
privacy of common people is really in danger. These would have huge impact on our
society and also on different communication platforms and communication tools. So, an
exceptional attention with innovative approach is needed when developing new
communication tools and platforms, as users will look for guaranteed quality, high level of

anonymity, privacy, and security. So, at this present scenario, it will not be wise to continue
as we used to do. Research institutions, governments, NGOs, business organisations
should take initiative to handle those threats from ethical, legal and technological context.
Finally, a universal framework for ‘New Media’ communication should be developed to
address the security, privacy and data protection issues.



7     Reference

ACCESS. Privacy & Data Protection on Social Networks. In: EDRI AND DIGITAL COURAGE
    (Germany) (Eds.). An Introduction to Data Protection. v. 6. Brussels: European Digital Rights, 2013.
    p. 14-15. Available at: <http://www.edri.org/files/paper06_datap.pdf>. Accessed on: 20 oct. 2013.



Democracia Digital e Governo Eletrônico, Florianópolis, n° 10, p. 377-393, 2014.
                                                                                                      391

BELLEFLAMME, P.; LAMBERT, T.; SCHWIENBACHER, A. Crowdfunding: Tapping the Right Crowd.

    Journal of Business Venturing, Forthcoming. CORE Discussion Paper No. 2011/32. Available at:
    <http://ssrn.com/abstract=1578175>. Accessed on: 26 nov. 2013.
BOMMERT, B. Collaborative innovation in the public sector. International Public Management Review,

    v. 11, n. 1, p. 15–33, 2010.
BRABHAM, D C. Crowdsourcing. Massachusetts: The MIT Press, 2013.
CASAL, D. P. Crowdsourcing the Corpus: Using Collective Intelligence as a Method for Composition.

    Leonardo Music Journal, n. 21, p. 25-28, dec./2011.
CHAMALES, G., BAKER, R. Securing crisis maps in conflict zones. In: GLOBAL HUMANITARIAN
    TECHNOLOGY CONFERENCE, 2011, Seattle. Proceedings... Los Alamitos: IEEE, 2011. p. 426–

    430.
CHUNARA, R.; ANDREWS, J. R.; BROWNSTEIN, J. S. Social and News Media Enable Estimation of
    Epidemiological Patterns Early in the 2010 Haitian Cholera Outbreak. The American Journal of

    Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, v. 86, n. 1, p. 39-45, 2012.
COX, L.P. Truth in Crowdsourcing. IEEE Journal on Security and Privacy, v. 9, n. 5, p. 74-76, sept.-
    oct./2011.

DAWSON, R.; BYNGHALL, S. Getting Results from Crowds. San Francisco: Advanced Human
    Technologies, 2011.
DE VREEDE, T. et al. A Theoretical Model of User Engagement in Crowdsourcing. In: ANTUNES, P. et

    al. (Eds.). Collaboration and Technology. Lecture Notes in Computer Science Series, v. 8224. Berlin,
    Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013. p. 94-109.
EKINS, S; WILLIAMS, A. J. Reaching Out to Collaborators: Crowdsourcing for Pharmaceutical Research.

    Pharmaceutical Research, v. 27, n. 3, p. 393-395, mar./2010.
ESS, H. V. Harvesting Knowledge: Success Criteria and Strategies for Crowdsourcing. Available at:
    <http://www.slideshare.net/searchbistro/harvesting-knowledge-how-to-crowdsource-in-2010>.

    Accessed on: 14 feb. 2014.
ESTELLÉS-AROLAS, E.; GONZÁLEZ LADRÓN-DE-GUEVARA, F. Towards an integrated
    crowdsourcing definition. Journal of Information Science, v. 38, n. 2, p. 189–200, 2012.

FISHER, L. How Crowdsourcing Is Tackling Poverty In The Developing World. Forbes, 21 mar. 2012.
    Available at: <http://www.forbes.com/sites/benkerschberg/2012/03/21/how-crowdsourcing-is-
    tackling-poverty-in-the-developing-world/>. Accessed on: 21 nov. 2013.

FITT, V. A. Crowdsourcing the News: News Organization Liability for iReporters. William Mitchell Law
    Review, v. 37, n. 4, p. 1839-1867, 2011.
GALLAGHER, L. Experts: mHealth poses privacy challenge. Healthcare IT News, 9 jan. 2013. Available

    at: <http://www.healthcareitnews.com/news/experts-mhealth-poses-privacy-challenge>. Accessed on:
    11 nov. 2013.
GRIER, D. A. Gertrude Blanch of the Mathematical Tables Project. IEEE Annals of the History of
    Computing, v. 19, n. 4, p. 18-27, oct./1997.

______. Crowdsourcing for Dummies. Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons, 2013.
GRUBMÜLLER, V.; GÖTSCH, K.; KRIEGER, B. Social media analytics for future oriented policy


Democracia Digital e Governo Eletrônico, Florianópolis, n° 10, p. 377-393, 2014.
                                                                                                      392

making. European Journal of Futures Research, v. 1, n. 1, p. 1-9, dec./2013.

HALDER, B. Crowdsourcing for Social Change in the Global South: Challenges and Possibilities. In:
    INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE FOR E-DEMOCRACY AND OPEN GOVERNMENT, 2.,
    2013, Krems. Proceedings… Krems: Edition Donau-Universität Krems, 2013. p. 473-474.

HETMANK, L. Components and Functions of Crowdsourcing Systems: a Systematic Literature Review. In:
    INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON WIRTSCHAFTSINFORMATIK, 11., 2013, Leipzig.
    Proceedings… . Leipzig: University Leipzig, 2013. p 55-69.

HOWE, J. Crowdsourcing: A Definition. Crowdsourcing, 02 jun. 2006. Available at:
    <http://www.crowdsourcing.com/cs/2006/06/crowdsourcing_a.html>. Accessed on: 01 june 2013a.
______. The Rise of Crowdsourcing. Wired, 14 jun. 2006. Available at:

    <http://www.wired.com/wired/archive/14.06/crowds.html>      .Accessed on: 20 oct. 2013b.
______. Crowdsourcing: why the power of the Crowd is driving the Future of Business. New York: Crown
    Business, 2008.

HEINZELMAN, J; WATERS, C. Crowdsourcing Crisis Information in Disaster- Affected Haiti.
    Washington: United States Washington Institute of Peace, 2010. Special Report 252
KARNIN, E. D.; WALACH, E.; DRORY, T. Crowdsourcing in the Document Processing Practice. In:

    DANIEL, F.; FACCA, F. M. (Eds). Current Trends in Web Engineering. Lecture Notes in Computer
    Science Series, v. 6385. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, 2010. p 408-411.
KATZ, S. H. Encyclopedia of Food and Culture, v. 3; New York: The Gale Group, 2003.

KOBA, M. You hear lots about crowdfunding, but what is it? CBNC, CNBC Explains, 23 oct. 2013.
    Available at: <http://www.cnbc.com/id/101136608>. Accessed on: 24 oct. 2013.
LISLE, D. Humanitarian Travels: Ethical Communication in Lonely Planet Guidebooks. Available at:

    <http://www19.homepage.villanova.edu/karyn.hollis/prof_academic/Courses/2041-
    Travel/lisle_humanitarian_travels.pdf>. Accessed on: 15 nov. 2013.
MARTENS, R. IOM Data Protection Manual. International Organisation for Migration, Geneva.

    Switzerland, 2010. Available
    at:<http://publications.iom.int/bookstore/free/IOMdataprotection_web.pdf >. Accessed on 12 feb.
    2014.

MCGRAYNE, S. B. Prometheans in the Lab: Chemistry and the Making of the Modern World.
New York: McGraw-Hill, 2001.
MEIER, P. On Crowdsourcing, Crisis Mapping and Data Protection Standards. iRevolution: from

    innovation to Revolution, 5 feb. 2012. Available at: <http://irevolution.net/2012/02/05/iom-data-
    protection/>. Accessed on: 07 feb. 2014.
MORROWS, N., et al. Independent evaluation of the Ushahidi Haiti project. Medford: ALNAP, 2011.

NDTV. WikiLeaks emails allegedly show Dow spied on Bhopal activists. NDTV, 27 feb. 2012. Available at:
    <http://www.ndtv.com/video/player/news/wikileaks-emails-allegedly-show-dow-spied-on-bhopal-
    activists/224942>. Accessed on: 12 jan. 2014.
NORMAN, T. C. et al. Leveraging Crowdsourcing to Facilitate the Discovery of New Medicines. Science

    Translational Medicine, v. 3, n. 88, p. 88mr1, june/2011.



Democracia Digital e Governo Eletrônico, Florianópolis, n° 10, p. 377-393, 2014.
                                                                                                      393

OMAND, D.; BARTLETT, J.; MILLER, C. A balance between security and privacy online must be

    struck. London: Demos, 2012.
POBLET, M.; GARCIA-CUESTA, E.; CASANOVAS, P. Crowdsourcing Tools for Disaster Management: A
    Review of Platforms and Methods. 2014. In: Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence Series. Berlin,

    Heidelberg: Springer Verlag, (forthcoming).
ROBERT, M.: Crowdsourcing and the crisis-affected community. Lessons learned and looking forward from
    Mission 4636. Information Retrieval, v. 16, n. 2, p. 210-266, apr. 2013.

STECKLOW, S.; SONNE, P.; BRADLEY, M. Mideast Uses Western Tools to Battle the Skype Rebellion.
    The Wall Street Journal, 1 sept. 2011. Available at:
    <http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB10001424052702304520804576345970862420038>. Accessed

    on 10 nov. 2013.
STEVENS, D. Crowdsourcing: Pros, Cons, And More. Hongkiat.com, Web 2.0. Available at:
    <http://www.hongkiat.com/blog/what-is-crowdsourcing/>. Accessed on: 11 nov. 2013.

STROHMEYER, K. Not alone in a crowd: Crowdsourcing for healthcare. Level 3 Communications Blog,
    Healthcare, 9 july 2013. Available at: <http://blog.level3.com/healthcare/not-alone-in-a-crowd-
    crowdsourcing-for-healthcare/>. Accessed on: 08 nov. 2013.

TOCH, E. Crowdsourcing privacy preferences in context-aware applications. London: Springer-Verlag,
    2012.
VAN, V. E. B. Obstacles to European research projects with data and tissue: solutions and further challenges.

    European Journal of Cancer, v. 44, n. 10, p. 1438–50, july/2008.
WANG, Y.; HUANG, W.; LOUIS, C. Respecting User Privacy in Mobile Crowdsourcing. Science Journal,
    v. 2, n. 2, p. 1-15, 2013.

WEPSTER, S. A. Between Theory and Observations: Tobias Mayer's Explorations of Lunar Motion. New
    York, Dordrecht, Heidelberg, London: Springer, 2010.
WILLIAM, E. Defending users against smart-phone apps: techniques and future directions. In:

    INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON INFORMATION SYSTEMS SECURITY, 7., 2011, Berlin.
    Proceedings… Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2011.p. 49-70.
WINDT, P. V. D. From Crowdsourcing to Crowdseeding: The Cutting Edge of Empowerment?

    Available at: <http://petervanderwindt.files.wordpress.com/2012/03/crowdseedingoup.pdf>. Accessed
    on: 04 dic./2013.
WORLD BANK. Information and Communications for Development 2012: Maximizing Mobile.

    Washington: World Bank, 2012.












Democracia Digital e Governo Eletrônico, Florianópolis, n° 10, p. 377-393, 2014.