Geography Compass 9/1 (2015): 14–26, 10.1111/gec3.12193





Geo-awareness, Geo-enablement, Geotechnologies, Citizen

Science, and Storytelling: Geography on the World Stage

Joseph J. Kerski   *
Education Manager, Esri, 1 International Court, Broomﬁeld, Colorado USA



Abstract
Five converging global trends – geo-awareness, geo-enablement, geotechnologies, citizen science, and
storytelling– have the potential to offer geography a world audience – attention from education and
society that may be unprecedented in the history of the discipline. Issues central to geography are now
part of the global consciousness. Everyday objects are rapidly becoming locatable, and thus able to be
monitored and mapped. Many tools and data sets that were formerly used and examined only by
geographers and other earth and environmental scientists are now in the hands of the general public.

Citizens outside academia are becoming involved in contributing data to the scientific community.
Multimedia and cloud-based Geographic Information Systems (GIS) have greatly multiplied the
attraction that maps have had for centuries to tell stories. But despite these trends bringing opportunity
to geography, is geoliteracy becoming increasingly valued? How can educators, researchers, and
practitioners seize the opportunity that these trends seem to present to actively promote geographic
content knowledge, skills, and perspectives throughout education and society?




Introduction
Myaimsinthisdocumentarethreefold.First,Imakethecasethatfiveconvergingglobaltrends
are exerting great impact on geography, on education, and on society. Second, in light of these

trends, I consider whether geoliteracy is becoming increasingly valued. Third, I offer practical
suggestions to the geography educator, researcher, and practitioner to be able to seize the
opportunities that these trends offer for developing geographic knowledge, skills, and
perspectives in education and society.


FIVE CONVERGING GLOBAL TRENDS

Five converging global trends may present geography with world attention that may be
unprecedented in the history of the discipline (Figure 1). These include geo-awareness,
geo-enablement, geotechnologies, citizen science, and storytelling. Each of these recent trends
is transforming the audience for geography and how geography is taught and perceived.


GEO-AWARENESS

The world faces complex challenges that are global in nature but also are increasingly affecting
individuals’ everyday lives. Few hours pass without the impact of seismic or weather-related
hazardsonhumanpopulations.Disastersresultingfromthesehazardsaffectcommunities,coun-
tries, and sometimes, entire continents. Changing birth rates and immigration are global issues
that impact the politics and economics of nations and the social fabric of local communities.

The supply of energy resources is fundamental to enable the use of technology and has been

© 2015 The Author(s)
Geography Compass © 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
                                                                Geography on the World Stage    15





















Fig. 1. Five converging global trends that present geography with new global opportunities.


linked to standards of living and educational attainment. Epidemics and diseases affect specific
segments of society and impact the entire planet in significant ways. Sustaining agriculture
and fisheries is critical to food supplies. The transportation of people and products consumes
massiveamountsofhumantimeand energy. Issuesof waterqualityand quantityarefundamen-

tal to the very existence of humanity. Political instability and violence displace whole
populations.
   These challenges have long been some of the fundamental issues that geographers studied.
Yet in the past decade, these challenges have become a part of the public consciousness. The
themes that have driven geographic thinking and research have in large part become topics of
everyday conversation. There is a heightened awareness that these issues affect individuals’

everyday lives, that they are serious, and that they need to be solved. There is also growing
realization that they all occur somewhere, at multiple scales, with specific spatial distributions,
patterns, and linkages; and with temporal and spatial components.



GEO-ENABLEMENT

Societies are rapidly moving to an era where most everything in everyday life will be able to be
located on a map, or “geo-enabled.” From smartphones to tablets and laptops, from webcams
recording traffic or bird counts to whether car parking lot sensors, from orbiting Earth-imaging
satellites to surface or underground sensors recording water quality, seismicity, and weather,
these sensorsand devicestransmita latitude–longitude signal,enabled by the coupling ofGlobal
Positioning Systems (GPS), smartphone towers, and Wi-Fi transmitters. As geo-enabling

extends to thermostats, light switches, and appliances in ordinary homes, it contributes to
“the internet of things” (Wasik 2013) and “smart cities” (Al-Hader and Rodzi 2009). As these
measurements become mapped within Geographic Information Systems (GIS) and remote
sensing environments, they become a “nervous system” for the planet (Dangermond 2002).
Thisgeo-enablementistakingplaceatdifferentratesindifferentareasaroundtheworld,leading
to a more uniform access to technology in some areas, and increasing inequalities because of

access to devices, bandwidth, and data in other areas.

© 2015 The Author(s)                                         Geography Compass9/1 (2015): 14–26, 10.1111/gec3.12193
Geography Compass © 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
16 Geography on the World Stage

GEOTECHNOLOGIES

Until recently, satellite imagery, digital maps, aerial photographs, 3D profiles, geodatabases,
spatial statistics, and related tools, methods, and data were used largely by those in GIS and
scientific fields. Today, millions of maps and satellite images are viewed hourly. Like music,
graphics, office tools, and other technologies, GIS has been migrating to a cloud-based
“Software as a Service” (SaaS) model. Not only have geographic tools, maps, and spatial data
become instantly available, they can be downloaded, streamed, embedded, changed, and
reformatted on devices from smartphones to tablets, in the field, in vehicles, in research labs,

in classrooms, and just about everywhere. These digital maps are used in newscasts, web pages,
videos, and news feeds, becoming among the most common type of 21st Century media.
Geodatabases map and synthesize data coming in from geo-enabled devices and objects, and
through these objects, the public has become extremely conscious of the value of maps in their
everyday lives.


CITIZEN SCIENCE

The largest part of the “internet of things” sensor network is not electronic sensors, but the
general public themselves. In fields such as phenology and bird monitoring,the public has been
engaged for decades in contributing their own observations, but web-based GIS makes it easier
for the generalpublic tocontributedata.The generalpublic isalsovoluntarily and involuntarily
providing information about their location through the use of cloud-based smartphone and
web applications. Information being fed to cloud-based services offers to make life more
efficient,comfortable,andinteresting.Examplesincludeconnectingwithothersthroughfitness

apps, recommending products matching a person’s purchasing history, and feeding individuals’
current speed and location to a regional real-time traffic map so that motorists can avoid snarls.
InformationaboutthelocationofthingsareofhighinteresttothoseprovidingInternetservices.
However, even more interesting to service providers are the movements of people, who make
up a seven billion strong sensor network – providing information about the planet as has never
been gathered before.


STORYTELLING

For centuries, maps have been valued because they provide a large amount of detail in a small
amount of space, and because of their capacity for telling a story. Telling stories through maps
began with describing explored lands in great detail against terra incognita.Tda,orhi
tools, data, and multimedia on the web expand the ability and audience for storytelling through
maps. Any person with a smartphone or computer can use maps to tell his or her story.
   Platforms that enable citizens to tell stories through maps include Esri Story Maps (http://
storymaps.arcgis.com), Map Story (http://mapstory.org), and other tools. Today’s story maps

range in scale, theme, and purpose. From Napoleon’s march to this year’s hurricanes, from
China’s new highways towherefoodoriginates, educators, students, researchers,and the public
can create their own story maps, through the use of live web maps with text, video, audio,
sketches, and photographs. Teaching about the dynamic Earth with dynamic maps seems
particularly appropriate to many (Hong 2014).
   Thisisnotthefirsttimewhengeographywasaffordedgreatopportunity.DuringWorldWar
II and again during the Cold War and Space Race, a heightened awareness of global affairs

translated into calls for increased frequency and quantitative rigor in geography and Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) education. However, these periods
tended to be short-lived, and were accompanied by setbacks, such as the closure of many

© 2015 The Author(s)                                        Geography Compass9/1 (2015): 14–26, 10.1111/gec3.12193
Geography Compass © 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
                                                                Geography on the World Stage    17

geography departments in the USA (Dobson 2007). Will the five trends occurring today be

enough to generate and sustain the interest of the general public, as well as policymakers and
educational administrators? Will this enable the recognition of geography and the geographic
perspective and cement geography as a fundamental, funded, respected subject throughout
education and in decision making throughout society?


GEOLITERACY

Eachoftoday’sissuesofconcerntothepublicisfundamentallytiedtospaceandplace–theyare
geographic issues. To grapple with these issues requires a population that can assess and use
geographic information to make wise decisions—in short, a geoliterate population. Pattison
(1964) defined geoliteracy as including four traditions, or foundations: spatial, area studies,

man-land, and earth science. Researchers from two geography associations (Natoli, et al.,
1984) identified five themes—movement, region, human-environment interaction, location,
and place. Edelson (2012) stated that it should include how our world works, how our world
is connected, and how to make well-reasoned decisions, or interactions, interconnections,
and implications. I believe that geoliteracy requires cultivation in each of what I consider to
betheessential“three legs” of the stool of geographicliteracy:(i)corecontent, (ii) skills inusing

geographic tools, and (iii) the geographic perspective (Figure 2).
   Thefirstlegofthestooliscorecontent.Whilecorecontentisimportant,itisoftenmaligned,
perhaps because it is often equated with memorization of facts for examinations. Geography’s
corecontentisricherthanmerefacts:Muchofthe corecontentissystemsthinking:ecosystems,
and systems of climate, culture, watersheds, oceans, land use, governments, and Earth-Sun
relationships. Core content focuses include learning about natural phenomena such as how

ocean currents affect climate, and cultural phenomena, such as sense of place.
   The second leg of the stool is the development of skills, including the effective use of
geographic tools. Many geographic tools and skills are focused on maps, such as analyzing

























Fig. 2. Geoliteracy can be conceptualized as being supported by content knowledge, skills, and the geographic perspective.

© 2015 The Author(s)                                         Geography Compass9/1 (2015): 14–26, 10.1111/gec3.12193
Geography Compass © 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
18 Geography on the World Stage

remotely sensed imagery, using GPS and geolocation, representing the Earth as map layers, and
using 2D and 3D data in GIS environments. Others, including assessing data quality, graphing
and charting, classifying, collecting, analyzing, and mapping field data, and communicating

geographic content, are important skills as well.
   Fundamental to skill building is the geographic inquiry process. This process includes asking
geographic questions, acquiring geographic data, exploring geographic data, analyzing
geographic information, and acting on geg  oraphic knowledge gained. Despite the“geographic”
words used to describe this inquiry process, the process can and should occur in any discipline.
Thus, the geographic inquiry model reflects anduspports scientific inq    uiry. Researchers and
practitioners advocate that geography shoulde  btaught often and deeply, in problem-based and
project-based learning environmen  ts (Capraro and Slough 2013), with“wicked problems” that

are difficult to solve. The focus on inquiry tran  lstes into minimizing fact-based worksheets
while maximizing hands-on work, discussion, ad     n communication. Inquiry includes tackling
issues--landfills, urban greenways, and traifcf, pros and cons of energy extraction, and the
implications of rapid growth in spceific ecoregions and populationdecline in others. In each case,
mapping is seen as the key to understandig npatterns, relationships, and trends.
   The third leg of the stool—the geographic perspective—begins with “spatial thinking”.
The geographic perspective represents a certain way of seeing the world. Geographers see the
world working through a series of interwoven and changing spatial relationships, operating
from the level of chemical bonds in soil, to the distribution of macro invertebrates in a river,

to commuting patterns in a metropolitan area, to the ebb and flow of seasonal variation in
the temperate latitudes, to how ocean currents affect land climates, and beyond the Earth
itself, to Earth-Sun relationships. The geographic perspective seeks to discover why processes
and phenomena occur where they do, and includes themes of scale, region, diffusion, patterns,
and spatio-temporal relationships. The geographic perspective also includes critical thinking—
questioning and investigating where data come from, how to manage uncertainty, how
problems are framed, and the scale at which problems are addressed.


Is Geoliteracy Becoming Increasingly Valued?

Each of the five global tends identified offer geographers unique opportunities to advance the
core tenets of the discipline. But is this advancement occurring? Some evidence points to
increased attention and funding for geoliteracy, such as the National Science Foundation
(NSF) funding the “geography roadmap” project in the USA (Bednarz et al. 2014). NSF also
funded the GeoTech Center, a community college-driven effort to strengthen GIS education.
The GeoTech Center was instrumental in the creation of the Geospatial Technology
Competency Model (GTCM), which defines the expertise that distinguishes geospatial

professionals and skills. The GTCMhasbeen widely used toreinforce the notionthatsuccessful
useofgeospatialtechnologiesdoesnotrelymerelyontheacquisitionofsoftwareskills,butupon
personal effectiveness competencies, such as integrity, initiative, and lifelong learning, on
academic competencies, such as communications, geography, mathematics, science, and
engineering, and on workplace competencies, such as teamwork, creative thinking, problem
solving, working with technology, and business fundamentals. Finally, the National Academy
of Sciences, in their Learning to Think Spatially (2006) report, stated that intentional teaching
of spatial thinking was valuable in education, that spatial thinking needed to start with young

students, and that it taught often and in deep ways.
   As geography aligned itself with Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(STEM) in the USA in recent years, geography has been the recipient of attention and funding.
To bring together scientists and educators from cognitive science, psychology, computer

© 2015 The Author(s)                                        Geography Compass9/1 (2015): 14–26, 10.1111/gec3.12193
Geography Compass © 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
                                                                Geography on the World Stage   19

science, education, geoscience, and neuroscience, the Spatial Intelligence and Learning
Center (Grossner 2012). Internationally, the Spatial Literacy in Teaching (SPLINT) initiative

in the UK focuses on the pedagogy of geospatial technologies and the enhancement of spatial
literacy in higher education (Janelle et al., 2009).
   Geo-awareness is also gaining attention for geography. As decision makers increasingly engage
in geographic tools, educators advocate that there is an increased need to understand how to
wisely use these tools. Coupled with this is media attention on “big data” and a growing
awareness that much data exist in mappable forms. Data fluency (Jukes et al. 2010) means to
understand the capabilities but also the limitations of data. Maps are incredibly useful, but

contain distortions and limitations, such as map projections, scale, resolution, and attribute
completeness. Those with the geographic perspective and skills must be included in the
discussionsaboutthewiseuseoftheongoingdelugeofdata,suchasissuesofcopyright,privacy,
data aggregation, interpretation, and communication of that data. Because geographers are
tasked to understand the whole world, those with the geographic perspective are well-suited
to understand when connections exist between data and the implications. They are well-suited
toseparatethetrivialfromtheimportant,toconsidertheimplicationsof informationonsociety,
and counsel society on the interpretation of the data about people and the built and natural

environment.
   More significant evidence, however, exists in the adoption rate of what many consider to be
foundational tools of geography--geotechnologies. Educators are adopting geospatial tools
more rapidly now, prompting observation that GIS adoption is moving past “innovators” and
“early adopters” to the “early majority” of educators (Kerski, 2015). The likeliest causes are
(i) the advent of web-based GIS tools and (ii) a renewed focus in education on inquiry. The
advent of web-based GIS flattens the learning curve for educators and students, enables analysis

and exploration to take place on the web without large software packages to install, and can be
used on any device. That maps and geographic data have become one of the most popular
resources on the Internet comes as no surprise. People have always been fascinated with
investigating their home – the Earth. For centuries, maps have stirred imaginations and inspired
explorations of the unknown. Maps provide a rich source of information in a small amount of
space, showing spatial relationships between climate, vegetation, population, landforms, river
systems,soils, natural hazards, and much more. Ineducation, maps have alwaysdone more than

locate “where” places are – they enable students to investigate the “whys of where”– the
essence of scientific and geographic inquiry.


SEIZING THE MOMENT: STEPPING FORWARD IN PRACTICE

How can geography educators, researchers, and practitioners seize the opportunity that these
trends offer to actively promote the inclusion of geographic content knowledge, skills, and
perspectives throughout education and society? I offer the following recommendations and
welcome a dialogue on the topic.


   Tie Geo-Awareness tothe Needfor GeographyEducation. A growing awareness ofthe geographic
nature of problems from local to global scales is evident, yet a realization that these issues can be
better understood using the geographic perspective seems lacking. The geography community
could take this opportunity to explain to the public what geography really is, why it is impor-

tant, and how it can help society grapple with these issues. As the geographic perspective, con-
tent, and skills are becoming more valued by other disciplines on the university campus (Sinton
2006), geographers can open the dialogue to interdisciplinary pathways of research.

© 2015 The Author(s)                                        Geography Compass9/1 (2015): 14–26, 10.1111/gec3.12193
Geography Compass © 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
20 Geography on the World Stage

   Contribute to theDialogueAboutIssuesSurroundingGeo-enablement.Geographersshouldactively
contribute to the discussions that are in the public consciousness about the implications of
geo-enablement, such as location privacy and crowdsourcing. They should also demonstrate

how geography education can help foster skills in handling and interpreting the deluge of data
that ensues from geo-enablement.
   Emphasize that maps are not just reference documents. Many regard maps largely as reference
documents. Geographers must demonstrate how maps can be a doorway to discovery about
the physical and cultural world and local communities in which we live.
   Emphasize that digital maps are usually more useful than paper maps. Because of these changes and
the increased demand for base data for use in GIS, paper maps are limited; they have been con-
verted into digital form to expand their use for new applications. Geographers can discuss with

their students the advantages and challenges of paper maps and digital maps.
   Maps are not just for geographers. Maps are useful to broad sectors of society, such as an
epidemiologist studying the spread of diseases, climatologists studying climate change, and
businesspersons siting new franchises. Maps are essential tools for studying these issues and for
solving real problems.
   Modeleffectiveuseofgeotechnologiesin teaching,research,andotherapplications.Geographerscan use
the democratization of geotechnologies to explain why and how skills in using these tools are
essential to many careers and everyday tasks.
   Engage the Citizen Science Community. Geographers can use the energy, expertise, and size of

the citizen science community to illustrate why phenomena can be understood more
completely when it is mapped. GIS provides a framework that enables the management of
the large volume of data generated by the citizen science community.
   Promote Civic Engagemen.tGeographers can use citizen science, fieldwork, and geotechnologies
to cultivate a culture of civic engagement, whree volunteer efforts are made more visible and
local, including students want to o cntribute to their own community.
   TellStorieswithMaps.Geographerscantakeadvantageofthelongstandinginterestthatpeople
have had with maps, and the equally rich tradition of telling stories, to use web-based dynamic

mapping tools engage the general public.
   Focus on Change. Nearly all issues and problems have a change component. Because the
Earthischanging,aplatformto map thatchangethatalsois dynamicisthe perfectcomplement,
and that is what web based mapping offers.
   Focus on Connections to Educational Content Standards. For the trends identified above to be
embraced in educational systems around the world, the activities based on them need to be
firmly and demonstrably anchored in content standards.
   Focus on Workforce Needs. Focusing on workforce needs helps make education more relevant
to society. The Geographic Information Science and Technology’sBodyofKnoldge        (Dibiase et al.,

2007) and the Geopstial Technology Competency Model help guide course planning. The
Partnerships for 21 Century Skills (www.p21.org) documents can help ensure that relevant skills
are taught in these programs.
   Focus on Career Skills. Geotechnologies were identified by the US Department of Labor
(Gewin 2004) as one of three major growth fields for the 21st Century. The use of GIS and
web mapping technologies builds skills in technology, organization, communication, critical
thinking, and other skills needed by government agencies, the private sector, academia, and
nonprofit organizations.

   Help Students to Engage with the To.she bulk of geotechnology training in secondary and univer-
sity education over the past 20years has been gearte  owards educators, rather than students. While
this has the advantage of working with profo   essials who in turn could impact thousands of others,
educators must realize that it is even more important forstth udentsto learn how to use these tools.

© 2015 The Author(s)                                         Geography Compass9/1 (2015): 14–26, 10.1111/gec3.12193
Geography Compass © 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
                                                               Geography on the World Stage   21

   Engage the Research Community. For educators and policymakers to be convinced that it is
worth their time and finances to invest in geographic perspectives, geography content, and

geospatial technologies for teaching and learning, a research base needs to be solidly developed.
While some studies have investigated the effectiveness and implementation of geographic
perspectives, content, and skills, much remains to be studied. Research is needed in the
development and evaluation of assessment instruments, and in the most effective strategies for
teaching and learning with geospatial technologies, particularly web-based tools.
   Don’t Neglect the Educational Policymakers. To effect change in education, it is important that
policymakers are convinced that teaching and learning geographic concepts, skills, and tools

bring value, substance, and interest into education. They also need to be convinced that it will
help them achieve their policy goals, including increased student performance, retention and
graduation rates, critical thinking, and problem-solving ability.


TEACHING AND LEARNING WITH WEB MAPPING TOOLS

The advent of today’s geotechnologies affords numerous opportunities for the educator and
student toanalyze diverse phenomena – from population distributiontobiomes – atscalesfrom
local to global, over many time periods. However, determining which resources and tools are

most valuable for instruction can be confusing. Let us focus on a few excellent places to start,
and model how to use these resources in education.


Methods of incorporating inquiry through Web mapping

Becausethe Earthismonitored as neverbefore, satelliteimagesand aerialphotographsare often
collected before, during, and after natural disasters or other Earth-changing events. For
example, using the USGS Coastal resources at http://coastal.er.usgs.gov/hurricanes/katrina/
enables discussions about impact, land use, preparedness, and policy, in this case, about
Hurricane Katrina (Figure 3).
   Educatorscancomparehistoricaltocurrentsatelliteimagesovera40-yeartimespanusingthe
Esri Change Matters Viewer (http://changematters.esri.com/compare). Sensors taking these

images use infrared wavelengths, prompting discussion about the electromagnetic spectrum.
At any scale and location, students can investigate changes, the reason for those changes, and
analyze whether the changes were from natural forces or human-caused forces. Students can
compare historical street view imagery in Google Maps and discuss changes in seasons, time
of day, natural features, and the human-built environment.
   As an example, the intersection of issues of irrigation, politics, climate, and internal drainage
canbeinvestigatedthroughthepast40yearsofchangeintheAralSeainCentralAsia(Figure4).
   Using ArcGIS Online (www.arcgis.com), a web-based mapping platform containing

analytical tools, maps, and data, students can investigate 150years of hurricane patterns in the
USA (Figure 5). The data can be re-classified and symbolized, and additional variables can be
overlaid, such as population density or current storms. This is done not to make the “perfect
map” but to deepen understanding of the variables under study.
   Students can use GPS receivers, tablets, probes, smartphones, or even pencil and paper to
record attributes for input into a live web map. Students can collect data in citizen science
“crowdsourced” mode (Goodchild 2007), as well as make their maps true multimedia

experiences (Kerski 2014) (Figure 6).
   Students mapping data collected in the field gain experiences and skills, but the importance
extends further into immersion in natural places (Louv 2006), cultivating connections to the

© 2015 The Author(s)                                        Geography Compass9/1 (2015): 14–26, 10.1111/gec3.12193
Geography Compass © 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
22 Geography on the World Stage





































Fig. 3. Oblique aerial image of Biloxi, Mississippi waterfront in 1998, and in 2005, after Hurricane Katrina. Access this map
here: www.arcgis.com/home/webm/aiewer.html?webmap=efc6e9335dc4d95dc4d959495875dd775e33d


local environment (Sobel, 1999 and 2005), even if fieldwork is limited to their own campus
(Broda 2007).
   Maps have received attention due to the advent of storytelling capabilities coupled with

dynamic cloud-based mapping services. Esri Storymaps (http://storymaps.arcgis.com) allow
students and educators to weave text, audio, video, photographs, and live webmaps together
totellstoriesabout historicaltocurrent events,field experiences,exploring the majorcharacters
in fiction or nonfictional works, and much more (Figure 7).



Synthesis

Students active in geography education develop key critical thinking skills, including
understanding how to carefully evaluate and use data. Students who are well grounded in the
spatial perspective through geography may be better able to use data at a variety of scales, in a
variety of contexts, think systematically and holistically, and use quantitative and qualitative ap-

proaches to solve problems, becoming better decision-makers (Milson and Kerski, 2012). Stu-
dents engaged in web mapping tools make heavy use of the geographic inquiry process. Key to
this process is that geography is taught as an applied science and it leads to action. It also leads to


Geography Compass © 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd                  Geography Compass9/1 (2015): 14–26, 10.1111/gec3.12193
                                                                         Geography on the World Stage        23

































Fig. 4. Aral Sea as seen from the Landsat satellite in 1975 (left) and 2000 (center) with changes between those two time
periods (right), using the Change Matters viewer.



























Fig. 5. Examining the 10 most damaging hurricanes in the USA over the past 150 years, using ArcGIS Online.


expanding careers. Web mapping,a green technology, is used on a daily basis to benefit the en-
vironment, from protecting habitat to planning urban greenways, and thousands of other ways.

   These tools may hasten the ability of educators to meet spatial learning challenges (National
Research Council 2006), and can support standards-based, inquiry-driven methods of teaching


© 2015 The Author(s)                                                 Geography Compass9/1 (2015): 14–26, 10.1111/gec3.12193
Geography Compass © 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
24 Geography on the World Stage























Fig. 6. Collaborative citizen science tree mapping from smartphones, mapped in ArcGIS Online.

























Fig. 7. A sample gallery of storymaps on a wide variety of subjects and scales, on http://storymaps.arcgis.com.




and learning, while providing basic analysis tools for exploring geographic or scientific data
(Milson, Demirci, and Kerski 2012). They can be key in addressing skills identified by the Part-

nerships for 21st Century Skills initiative (LeVasseur 2005) and in recommendations on the
value of thinking spatially (Bednarz 2004; Gersmehl and Gersmehl 2006). As noted above,
the geo-enablement of societies is in some places leading to greater access in some areas and
greater inequalities in others (Graham, 2011).

   Students can use these resources to understand that the Earth is changing and think
geographically, scientifically, and analytically about why it is changing. After using these web


Geography Compass © 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd                     Geography Compass9/1 (2015): 14–26, 10.1111/gec3.12193
                                                               Geography on the World Stage   25

maps, students need to ask and grapple with value-based questions. Should the Earth be
changingintheseways?IsthereanythingthatIshouldbedoingaboutit?Thiscapturesnotonly

the heart of spatial thinking, inquiry, and problem-based learning, but of education for activism
– to make a difference in this changing world of ours.
   Given the five trends identified in this article, geography seems poised to occupy a more
important role in education and society. Will geographers seize the opportunity afforded to
the discipline to catapult it to the “world stage”?


Getting Started

ArcGIS Online:www.arcgis.com/home– Maps, apps, tools, and data, which allow for investigation
of local to global issues, in the field or in the classroom on tablets, laptops, or smartphones.
   WorldMapper: www.worldmapper.org – Create cartograms on over 700 health, technology,
cultural, economic, physical geography, and other variables.
   Google Maps: maps.google.com – Examine satellite imagery and maps; examine historical and
current street views of streets, but also trails and points of interest.
   GapMinder: www.gapminder.org– Examine trends in demography, health, and economics by
country and over time with dynamic graphs and data.

   Urban Observatory: www.urbanobservatory.org – Compare population density, land use, and
other variables for dozens of urban areas around the world.
   Milson,Andrew,Demirci,Ali,and Kerski,Joseph J.2012.InternationalPerspectivesonTeaching
and Learning with GIS in Secondary Schools. Springer, 353 pp. Discover how schools in 33
countries around the world are using geotechnologies.
   Esri Education Community blog: http://blogs.esri.com/esri/gisedcom/. Connect to the global
community in GIS in education and discover data, tools, best practices, and professional

development.
   YouTube Geography Channel: www.youtube.com/geographyuberalles Learn about space,
place, geotechnologies, fieldwork, geog raphy, and STEM education with the over 2500
videos here.


Short Biography

Joseph Kerski is a geographer who believes that spatial analysis through digital mapping can

transform education and society through better decision-making using the geographic
perspective. He holds three degrees in Geography. He has served as geographer and
cartographer at NOAA, the US Census Bureau, and the US Geological Survey. He teaches
online and face-to-face courses at primary and secondary schools, through MOOCs, and
universities such as Sinte Gleska University and the University of Denver. He serves as
Education Manager for Esri and focused on thought leadership in geospatial technology
education. This includes curriculum development, research in the effectiveness of GIS in

education, professional development for educators, and fostering partnerships to support GIS
in education at all levels, internationally. He has authored books such as Spatial Mathematics,
The Essentials of the Environment,and The GIS Guide to Public Domain Data.


Note

* Correspondence address: Joseph Kerski, Esri Education 1 International, Esri, Broomﬁeld, Colorado, 80021 USA. Email:
jkerski@esri.com

© 2015 The Author(s)                                        Geography Compass9/1 (2015): 14–26, 10.1111/gec3.12193
Geography Compass © 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd
26 Geography on the World Stage


References


Al-Hader, M. and Rodzi, A. 2009. The smart city infrastructure development and monitoring. Theoretical and Empirical
   Researches in Urban Management 2 (11), pp. 87–94.
Bednarz, S. W. 2004. Geographic information systems: A Tool to support geography and environmental education.
   GeoJournal 60, pp. 191–199.
                                                                                st
Bednarz, S. W., Heffron, S. and Huynh, N. T. 2014. A road map for 21 century geography education: Geography
   education research. J-Reading: Journal of Research and Didactics in Geography. 1(3),pp.81 –86.
Broda, H. 2007. Schoolyard-Enhanced Learning: Using the Outdoors as an Instructional Tool. Portland, Maine, USA: Stenhouse

   Publishers, pp. 192.
Capraro, R. and Slough, S. W. 2013. Why PBL? Why STEM? Why now? An introduction to STEM project-based learning, in
   STEM Project Based Learning. Dordrecht: Springer, pp. 1–15.
Dangermond, J. 2002. Taking the pulse of the planet with GIS. Arcnews. Redlands, California, USA: Spring 2002.

DiBiase, D., DeMers, M., Johnson, A., Kemp, K., Luck, A. T., Plewe, B. and Wentz, E. 2007. Introducing the ﬁrst edition
   of the geographic information science and technology body of knowledge. Cartography and Geographic Information Science
   34 (2), pp. 113–120.
Dobson, J. E. 2007. Bring back geography! ArcNews. Redlands, California, USA: Spring 2007.
                                                            st
Edelson, D. C. 2012. Geo-education: Preparation for 21        Century Decisions. ArcNews. Summer. http://www.esri.com/
news/arcnews/summer12articles/geo-education-preparation-for-21st-century-decisions.html.
Gersmehl,P. andGersmehl,C.2006. Wanted:A concise list of neurologically defensible andassessable spatialthinkingskills.
   Research in Geographic Education 8, pp. 5–38.

Gewin, V. 2004. Mapping opportunities. Nature427, pp. 376–377.
Goodchild, M. F. 2007. Citizens as sensors: The world of volunteered geography. GeoJournal69, pp. 211–221.
Graham, M. 2011. Time machines and virtual portals: The spatialities of the digital divide. Progress in Development Studies
   11(3), pp. 211–227.

Grossner, K. 2012. Finding the spatial in order to teach it. In: Kastens, K. A. and Manduca, C. A. (eds) Earth and Mind:
   A Synthesis of Research on Thinking and Learning in the Geosciences, Geological Society of America.ler,ColoradoUSA:
   Geological Society of America pp. 87–89.

Hong, J. E. 2014. Promoting teacher adoption of GIS using teacher-centered and teacher-friendly design. Journal of
   Geography 113 (4), pp. 139–151.
Janelle, D. G., Hespanha, S. R., Goodchild, F. and Goodchild, M. F. 2009. Workshops and national dissemination of
   geographic analysis in the social sciences: The CSISS experience in the USA. Journal of Geography in Higher Education

   33 (1), pp. S88–S103.
Jukes, I., McCain, T. and Crockett, L. 2010. Understanding the Digital Generation: Teaching and Learning in the New Digital
   Landscape. CreateSpace, pp. 174.
Kerski, J. J. 2015. Opportunities and Challenges in Using Geospatial Technologies for Education, In: Muñiz-Solari, O.,

   Demirci, A., van der Schee, J. (eds) Geospatial Technologies and Geography Education in a Changing World,Japan:Springer.
Kerski, J.J.2014.Mappingyourﬁelddata.ArcUser.Winter2014.www.esri.com/esri-news/arcuser/winter-2014/mapping-
your-ﬁeld-data.
LeVasseur, M. 2005. Geography: A 21st Century Skill. Cable in the Classroom. October. Access Learning, pp. 3.

Milson, A., Demirci, A. and Kerski, J. J. 2012. International Perspectives on Teaching and Learning with GIS in Secondary Schools.
   Netherlands: Springer.
Milson, A. andKerski,J.J.2012.Around the world with geospatialtechnologies. Social Education 76(2):105-108. Washington DC:
   National Council for the Social Studies.

National ResearchCouncil. 2006. Learning to Think Spatially—GIS as a Support System in the K-12 Curriculum. Washington
   DC: The National Academies Press, pp. 313.
Natoli, S. J., Boehm, R., Kracht, J. B., Lanegran, D., Monk, J. J. and Morrill, R. W. 1984. Guidelines for geographic education:
   Elementary and secondary schools. Washington, DC: Association of American Geographers.

Pattison, W. D. 1964. The four traditions of geography. Journal of Geography 63 (5), pp. 211–216.
Sinton, D. S. 2006. Understanding Place: GIS and Mapping Across the Curriculum. Redlands, CA: Esri Press, pp. 282.
Sobel, D. 1999. Beyond Ecophobia: Reclaiming the Heart in Nature Education. The Orion Society, 45 p.

Sobel, D. 2005. Place-based Education. The Orion Society, 96 pp.
Wasik, B. 2013. Welcome to the programmable world. Wired. 14 May 2013. www.wired.com/gadgetlab/2013/05/inter-
net-of-things/all/








© 2015 The Author(s)                                                          Geography Compass9/1 (2015): 14–26, 10.1111/gec3.12193
Geography Compass © 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd