J. Pers. Med. 2012, 2, 93-118; doi:10.3390/jpm2030093
                                                                             OPEN ACCESS

                                                                         Journal of
                                                                     Personalized

                                                                           Medicine

                                                                           ISSN 2075-4426
                                                                 www.mdpi.com/journal/jpm/
Opinion

Health 2050: The Realization of Personalized Medicine through

Crowdsourcing, the Quantified Self, and the Participatory
Biocitizen


Melanie Swan

MS Futures Group, P.O. Box 61258, Palo Alto, CA 94306, USA; E-Mail: m@melanieswan.com;
Tel.: +1-650-681-9482; Fax: +1-504-910-3803

Received: 2 July 2012; in revised form: 15 August 2012 / Accepted: 15 August 2012 /
Published: 12 September 2012



     Abstract: The concepts of health and healthcare are moving towards the notion of
     personalized preventive health maintenance and away from an exclusive focus on the cure

     of disease. This is agains t the backdrop of contemporary public health challenges that
     include increasing costs, worsening outcomes, ‘diabesity’ epidemics, and anticipated
     physician shortages. Personalized preventive medicine could be critical to solving public
     health challenges at their causal root. Tpaper sets forth a vision and plan for the

     realization of preventive medicine by 2050 and examines efforts already underway such as
     participatory health initiatives, the era of big health data, and qualitative shifts in mindset.

     Keywords: personalized medicine; preventive medi cine; crowdsourcing; participatory
     medicine; participant-centric initiatives; digi tal health; health empowerment; health trust

     communities; quantified self; future of medicine



1. Introduction

1.1. Contemporary Public Health Challenges

   When considering the critical health challenges of th e current era, it is easy to think of the 18% of

the U.S. GDP being spent on health care ($8,402 per person per year in 2010) [1], health outcomes that
lag those of other Organization for Economic Co- operation and Development (OECD) countries [2],
J. Pers. Med. 2012, 2         94


the obesity epidemic (the U.S. Centers for Diseas e Control (CDC) estimates that 42% of American
adults will be obese by 2030 as compared to 34%          today) [3], aging worldwide populations [4],
anticipated physician and nursing shortages, the       high cost of bringing a new drug to market

($1.3 billion) [5], and the fact that 62% of bankruptcies in 2007 were me dically-related [6]. In spite of
these factors, this paper instead argues that the key public health challenge at present is the realization

of preventive medicine. Resolving this central highe r-order challenge could more expediently address
the other issues which may be more symptomatic than causal.

1.2. Health 2050


   Health 2050 is a term used in th is paper to collect attention around the idea of a practical project
with a feasible time frame for a meaningful shift to preventive medicine in both individual mindset and

societal institutions. Health 2050: Preventive Medicine is a meme that could expand into a conference,
research institution, think tank, government initiative , or other program. The core principles involve

the empowerment of the individual, at any age, to self-monitor and self-manage health and wellness,
and conditions of higher risk and existing diagnosis,    and further, to start doing this today with tools
that are already available.


1.3. Preventive Medicine

   The ‘realization of preventive me     dicine’ is an umbrella term     which subsumes personalized

medicine, and also the participator y and predictive aspects of the     notion of ‘4P medicine’ initially
promulgated by systems biologist Lee Hood (e.g., medicine that is predictive, personalized, preventive,
and participatory) [7]. This general area of personalized preventive medicine can be distinguished as a

form of medicine that uses info rmation about an individual’s genom e, current biophysical measures,
and environment to prevent, diagnose, and treat di     sease [8]. The objective of preventive medicine

is also relevant as it is a mu     ch-used term with different mean      ings. For example, to current
medical practitioners, preventive medicine may t ypically mean reducing hospital readmit rates for
already-diagnosed and treated patien ts since this is where a large     portion of medical costs accrue.

A more general objective of preventive medicine that is more broadly applicable is to extend healthy
lifespan and reduce disability. This   general objective is parlayed into a working definition in this

paper to discuss one aspect that can be app        lied most readily now by laypersons and medical
practitioners, the idea of keeping populations hea lthy and preventing conditions from arising in the

first place, especially now that data are starting   to be available to identif y and manage risks with
greater granularity ahead of time.
   The scope and organization of this paper is to     first discuss the expanded concept of health and

health care that is at the heart  of Health 2050: Preventive Medicine, then to look at the different
dimensions of a condition’s life cycle before it becomes clinical, and finally to propose how preventive

medicine may be realized through       participatory health initiatives, the era of big health data, and
philosophical shifts in mindset.
J. Pers. Med. 2012, 2        95


2. Health 2050: Preventive Medicine

   Part of Health 2050: Preventive Medi cine is realizing that there is now a much broader concept of
health and health care which has not yet been fully articula ted in the public di alogue. One of the

crucial conceptual shifts in preventive medicine      is that not just is a patient’s treatment in a
personalized n = 1 manner, but the patient, really a particip ant, or simply a person, becomes the nexus

of action-taking and empowerment.       N = 1 means that the indivi     dual, now through quantified
self-tracking and other low-cost ne wly-available tools, has the abil ity to understand his or her own
patterns and baseline measures, and obtain early warnings as to when th ere is variance and what to do

about this. Figure 1 depicts the expanded concept of health and health care.

      Figure 1. Health 2050: An expanded concept of h        ealth and health care. SNP: single

      nucleotide polymorphism, WGS: whole human genome sequencing.





























2.1. Greatly Expanded Range of Health Outcomes

   A range of health outcomes and objectives are colle cted in the box on the left in Figure 1. They are
greatly expanded from the traditional nearly exclusive focus on cure to branch upwards to a wider set

of endpoints such as establishing baseline and variability levels of phenotypic measures in individuals,
improving, normalizing, and preventing conditions, and proactively targeting longevity, enhancement,

and health as a self-expression mechanism of the indi vidual. This stratification in health outcomes is
already starting to be seen in the area of physical health with new focal points on condition prevention
and wellness maintenance. A similarly large, and      relatively untapped area is mental health. More
J. Pers. Med. 2012, 2         96


nascent in its problematization as a public health     concern, mental health and mental performance
optimization may become increasingly important as an outcome in the near future, especially with the
tools of modern technology such as the intimate therapeutic delivery platform of the mobile phone.


2.2. Data Stream Integration Needed for Personal Health Informatics

   In the box at the bottom are examples of the diffe        rent types of data that are starting to be

synthesized into an overall personal health informatics picture. These include genomic data in the form
of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)—locations in the genome where an individual may have a
different genetic sequence than the ‘normal’ type ; whole human or exome sequencing—more detailed

genomic information regarding protein-coding, re gulatory, and other regi ons of the genome; and
epigenetics—genetic changes that occur during an organism’s lifetime.

   Another health data stream is the transcriptome, or RNA expre ssion data, which is looking at the
levels of RNA messages that are transcribed from D NA and may be resident in cells at any time. The

farther future might include a comprehensive profile of RNA messages circulating in cells at any given
time. This information is of increasing interest as     the capability now exists to peer into cells in
real-time to assess whether certain genes are expr     essed or not. Similar to the transcriptome, the

metabolome provides a snapshot look at the levels of       metabolites such as sugars and fats that are
resident in cells. Metabolites are the chemical signatures (hormones and other signaling molecules) left

behind in cellular processes, and are useful in the an alysis of many things such as whether different
aspects of the cell are functioning normally.
   The microbiome (the ten times the number of human cells (1–2 gram s) that are carried on and in

each person as bacteria) is an important emerging      health data stream. The recent completion of the
Human Microbiome Project has helped to categori ze normal bacterial populati ons and their role in

disease development, drug response, and nutrien           t synthesis [9]. Othe    r data streams, the
environmentome and diseasome, are similar concepts        of overall profiling to elucidate the baseline
status and response of individuals in specific contexts. The environmentome is a measure of the impact

of the external environment and an individual’s ability to process toxins, and the diseasome is a
measure of an individual’s risk for developing different diseases in the future. These newer health data

streams ranging from genomics to the diseasome ar        e a complement to the traditional health data
streams of personal and family health history, bl      ood test data and other la   boratory results, and

prescription histories.
   These diverse health data streams are not just impor tant in isolation, but are being applied together
in a systems approach suited to the complexities     of the underlying biology. A standard example is

researchers looking at genomic pr ofiles and epigenetic changes t ogether with cellular expression
information to understand how pathology develops at the molecular level, for example in the cases of

autism and rheumatoid arthritis [ 10,11]. These data stream s are interesting not only for research, but
should also be deployed in clinical care. New health stream data will need to be collected, integrated,
and managed in clinical systems, with the relevant in formation aggregated in ways tailored to practical

implementation.
   The vast amounts of data alread      y being generated by current me      dical information practices

(e.g., medical records and imaging data) and even more so in preventive medicine (e.g., genomic files,
J. Pers. Med. 2012, 2         97


metabolic profiles, quantified self-tracking data,      etc.) raise the important role of information
management tools. The first tier is electronic    medical records (EMRs), which could become more
detailed over time. The current focus on personal an d family health history, prescription records, and

current diagnosis and treatment     details could be expanded to in     clude predictive risk-assessment
modules at the front-end to facilit ate the practice of preventive medi cine by integrating the relevant

health information streams depicted in Figure 1. Th e second tier is secure cloud storage systems with
different levels of permissioning access for the various data streams. Another tier is machine learning
and other algorithms to run on top    of the big data to search, access, and aggregate meaningful data

patterns, and translate them into actionable information and real-time personalized recommendations.

2.3. Participant-Centric Action-taking


   Now moving to the middle of the di agram, the individual is at the ce nter of action-taking related to
health and health care. Th ere are three progressive li nes of defense around the individual. First is the

continuous health information climate of always-on self-tracking devices and smartphone applications.
This technology blanket may increasingly provide automated digital health monitoring, data collection
such as baseline measures and variability norms, and ambient behavior management suggestions and

other real-time personalized recommendations. Alrea dy self-tracking gadgets and applications are
proving to be a mainstream phenomenon as 80% of U. S. Internet-connected adults have searched for

health information online [12] and thousands of consumers have snapped over 7.7 million food diary
photos with ‘The Eatery’ smartphone applicati       on [13]. The second line      of defense around the
individual is collaborations with health advisors and peers who have interests in similar conditions.

The expanding ecosystem for a more proactive approach to health includes in terest groups like health
social networks, crowdsourced stud ies, and the Quantified Self community. New categories of health

service providers, potentially compensated with Health Savings Account (HSA) dollars or other novel
payment structures, include health advisors, wellne ss coaches, preventive ca re providers, boutique
physicians, and genetic counselors. Next-generation software solutions in the form of more tightly-

integrated personal electronic health records are also part of this second laye r of defense. Finally, the
third line of defense around the i     ndividual is the public    health system where, after wellness

maintenance resources have been exhausted, the deep expertise of traditional health professionals is
appropriately and critically valuable for disease and trauma diagnosis and treatment.


Mental Performance and Cognitive Acuity is the New Health Frontier

   In the near-term, mental performance could emerge as the new health frontier, a critical component
of the notion of overa ll health. Much like personalized genomi cs has helped to destigmatize a variety

of physical disease conditions, tracking tools c     ould do the same for mental health. Cognitive
performance could come to be seen as a performan ce optimization activity with tools available for its

improvement, rather than as a deterministic definer of identity and possibilities. With personalized
genomics, we see that we are not in world as depicted in the dyst opian science fiction movie Gattaca
where some individuals are genetically perfect and ot hers are not. In our world, it is likely that every

individual is at higher than average risk for at le ast one of the top twenty common disease conditions
such as heart disease, diabetes, and cancer. This    knowledge, together with th e understanding of the
J. Pers. Med. 2012, 2        98


non-causal responsibility of the individual has helped to destigmatize disease and impel focus instead
on cures, and this attitude could persist into mental health.
   Emerging quantified data streams could be helpfu        l in elucidating the mental health of both

individuals and populations. The U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH) have estimated that 26.2% of
Americans ages 18 and older, one in four adults, suffer from a diagnosable mental disorder in any

given year [14]. In addition to stigmas surrounding seeking mental health assistance, costs are high,
and options are not well-known. A shift to the positive positioning of mental performance optimization
techniques rather than disease cures or ‘seeking he lp’ may cause more people to investigate solutions.

Additionally, a number of ne w health data streams may be extrem ely revelatory such as measuring
baseline and variability in indi vidual and population levels of bi    ophysical chemicals like cortisol

(related to stress), oxytocin (related to feelings of connection), and dopamine (related to the ability to
focus), and quantified assessments of qualities such as empathy, loneliness, happiness, and fulfillment.

With the presence of technology tools such as the     therapeutic intimacy of the mobile phone, mental
performance assessment and optimization could be ex        tended quickly to the vast majority of the
population. Recreational voice-based chatting with Siri, an intelligent personal assistant on the iPhone,

is possibly an early harbinger of what may become more elaborate personal virtual coaches delivering
real-time mental performance optim ization capabilities. Some effo rts already underway in mobile

mental health improvement include mood tracki ng smartphone applications like MoodPanda, mood
charting per text reminders [15], the myCompass pr ogram for mild-to-moderate stress, anxiety, and
depression management [16], and an application for better heart health through breathing exercises and

better emotion management through mood capture and intervention [17].

2.4. The 80% of a Condition’s Life Cycle While It Is still Pre-Clinical


   Critical to the broader concept of health and health care is the notion of wellness and prevention.
The tools, capability, and understanding are increasingly available to identify conditions ahead of time
and take measures which could ultimately result in prevention. Access to preventive medicine tools by

the largest possible segment of the population is          critical. Preventive medicine is inherently
democratized with the individual as the center of action-taking with free or cheaply available mobile

phone applications, online personal health records, and other increas ingly inexpensive or sponsored
self-tracking and monitoring solutions. The most succe ssful initiatives for engaging individuals in the

health context so far have had    value propositions that incorporate first and foremost, personalized
recommendations, and secondarily, social interacti on, gamification, attractive da ta visualizations of
contributed information, and other modern tech        niques to make using technologies fun while

simultaneously achieving behavior change goals [18]. The emerging preventive medicine ecosystem is
articulated in Table 1.


2.4.1. Concept of Health, Service Providers, Remedy Providers, and Research Conduct

   As seen previously in Figure 1, the first step is noticing that the definition of health and health care
is expanding to mean wellness maintenance and c ondition prevention as opposed to just the cure of

illness. One indication of the growing ecosystem in h ealth is the increasingly-used distinction business
are making between wellness and medi cine. Service providers too are changing, with a multiplicity of
J. Pers. Med. 2012, 2          99


health advisors, genomic counsel       ors, health maintena nce specialists, conc ierge physicians, and

targeted therapy providers such as personalized cancer genomics services CollabRX (Palo Alto, CA,

USA) and Foundation Medicine (Cambridge, MA,                USA) to supplement and off-load from the
traditional public health system. Remedy providers are expanding too, from pharmaceutical companies

to more of a focus on supplementation, stress re        duction, and other preventive treatments. Health
engagement platforms like Massive Health with           the previously mentioned food photo-journaling

application, The Eatery[20], ar e becoming a node in the landscape           , offering an effective mix of
quantified self-tracking data collection tools,         lightweight social networking interaction, and

gamification rewards, all of which combine to in fluence behavior change. The company has reported

that consumers improve the healthiness of their           eating habits within one month of using the
application, however these reports      are not without criticism. Health     research too is shifting, from

formerly being conducted primarily in academic se          ttings, to now being executed in a variety of
crowdsourced cohort programs, health social ne          tworks, and other forms of CRO 2.0, the next

generation of the Contract Resear ch Organization (organizations th at coordinate the operation of
clinical trials) [18].


       Table 1. The 80/20 Model: Addressing and eliminating conditions while still pre-clinical.

  Category                    Pre-Clinical (80%)                                     Clinical (20%)

  Concept of health           Wellness maintenance, prevention                         Illness cure
                              Wellness: Health advisors, wellness coaches,
  Service providers           genomic counselors, prevention specialists      Medical: Public health system

                              Health engagement platforms, health social
  Remedy providers            networks, peer collaborators, supplementation     Pharmaceutical companies

                              treatments, medical tourism
                              Crowdsourced studies, health social networks,
  Research conduct            CRO 2.0 [18]                                              Academia
                                    b
  Financial models            HSA, out of pocket                              Professional payers, insurance
  Privacy and security        Cloud, PHRs  c                                   Physician office, paper files

  Legislative influence       Patient Advocacy Groups                             Medical professionals
  Regulation and oversight    Portable consent [19], IRBI2.0d   Institutional
      a                                        b                                 c
        CRO: contract research organization;     HSA: health savings account;      PHR: personal health
      record; IRB: institutional review board.


2.4.2. Financial Models and Economics

   Economics is one of the most important components in enabling a shift to preventive medicine. The

health services industry could be another instit utional juggernaut to cr umble, following publishing,

music, and other industries. Incumb ents have little incen tive to change given that they are the few
organizations making the most money, but counterv ailing forces could impose. Widespread adoption

of HSAs by employer-funded health         plans is a favorable step sin ce price rationalization has been
pushed directly to the consuming party. It is nearly impossible for consumers to obtain the final out-of-

pocket cost for health services ahea d of time, and this is a significant pain point in the system that
could eventually force innovative      solutions. It is clear that the  ecosystem of funding sources and

models for health service economics needs to be expanded. Innovative health economics models could
J. Pers. Med. 2012, 2        100


be useful both unitarily (benefiting consumers of     specific solutions) and systemically (facilitating
pervasive institutional price and cost rationalization and validating the link between cost and benefit).
   Health is one of the few industries for which co st and price is hidden and in many cases unknown,

and has enormous variance as each payer negotiates       separately with each service provider. Greater
price rationalization and tighter linkage between service recipient and payer could help to make newly

emerging health services models more democratic and avoid the problem of new monopolists arising
in the ashes of the old if the systemic incentives have not changed. There is already a move away from
exclusive dependence on insurance companies and ot her professional payers to include HSAs, out-of-

pocket payments, and other financing models such          as specialized consum er health credit card
programs like CareCredit.

   Other innovative health economics models are nascent but are alr eady starting to have a positive
impact on the administration of health care and h ealth research funding. Some non-traditional sources

of funding include patient advocac y groups, more-radically oriented       research foundations, social
venture capital, crowdfunding, and self-funding [21]. Crowdfunding is a particul arly interesting new
financial tool made possible by large-scale crowdsourced Internet models. Crowdfunding is defined as

appealing to many individuals via the Internet to contribute small amounts to fund targeted projects of
interest. Some examples of crowdfunding websites        are Kickstarter (in a fa mous case raising $10

million for the Pebble smartwatch project), Petrid ish, and RocketHub, and emerging health-specific
crowdfunding sites like MedStartr. One or more dedicated health research crowdfunding sites could be
quite timely, allowing both professional researchers to supplement their traditional grant-based funding

sources, and participant-organized studies to find funders for special-interest and preventive medicine
health projects more expediently. Both the publi c and patient advocacy groups have a preference for

non-pharmaceutical remedies, and an interest in inve     stigating their efficacy. Health research study
crowdfunding efforts could be forward-integrated into health research collabo ration communities to
pre-fund studies where there is market demand and f acilitate recruitment, and backward-integrated to

automatically support individual pa rticipation in crowdsourced st udies. Funding could become a
recruitment tool and recruiting could become a funding tool.


2.4.3. Privacy and Security, Legislative Influence, and Regulation and Oversight

   Concerns over security and privacy remain tantamount. Here too there is innovation to facilitate the

transition to the preventive personalized health of the future. Health privacy models are being
reinvented with users storing their data in PHRs (p ersonal health records) in the cloud and controlling
access through different permissioning tiers, as opposed to the old model of patient data residing in

isolated physician office storage systems. The new era of big health data requires new privacy models,
and also engenders new models of political influe     nce. Patient advocacy groups may start to have

increased lobbying power and legislative influence as more individuals, finding out that they are at risk
for certain conditions, join advoc acy groups and support collaborativ e research and other preventive
and investigative activities. Alternatives to regulato ry and oversight models are starting to emerge as

well. One example is the idea of having a portable consent for personal data contribution to
studies [19], and the possibility of meeting the trad itional responsibilities of IRBs (institutional review

boards), ethical oversight and liability-grounding, through separate mechanisms [18].
J. Pers. Med. 2012, 2        101


   Another dimension of regulatory shift that may slowly ebb into existence is regarding classifications
and approvals. More granular regul atory definitions to support and stimulate the ne w generation of
self-analysis tools are required. One example is th    e legal distinctions rega rding what constitutes a

medical diagnosis. Technically in the U.S., only physicians are allowed to make a diagnosis, however,
the ‘return of research data’ may look similar to a di agnosis if the data are pr esented in certain ways.

This could be codified into acceptable legal practi ce or defined as a new category like ‘pre-diagnosis’
which could be acceptable from a legal, ethical, and regulatory perspective and help to foster greater
growth in preventive medicine assessment t        echnologies. An increasing number of quantified

health-tracking and detection gadge ts are coming to market and currently need different kinds of
regulatory approval. One solution in the U.S. is     to seek 510(k) clearance and a CLIA waiver for

devices such as a recently launched influenza de      tection panel from hea lth consumables provider
Becton Dickinson [22]. Another solu tion is to go to market more           quickly in countries that are

providing fast-access medical devi ce registration as a specializa tion policy, for example Singapore,
Hong Kong, Malaysia, Israel, Colombia, and Costa Ri ca. Global regulatory consultancies such as the
Emergo Group (http://www.emergogroup.com/) provide st rategic services regarding medical device

market entry. In more burdensome regulatory regimes       such as the U.S., preventive medicine efforts
could be spurred with a revised st ratification of graduated approval le vels that allow the new class of

low-risk non-invasive personal health assessment tools to come to market more expediently.

3. The Realization of Health 2050: Preventive Medicine

3.1. Personalized Typing


   Critical to Health 2050: Preventive Medicine is addressing conditions during the 80% of their life
cycle before they become clinical. In the past, th ere was little alternative in many cases but to conduct

disease treatment based on phenotypic presentation      as opposed to underlying disease mechanisms.
Disease classification has always    been challenging, especially gi    ven the realities of biological
heterogeneity where it can be di    fficult to distinguish between one   disease presenting in different

ways and the same symptom being generated by diffe rent pathologies. One important question is how
to appropriately group individuals into useful ca    tegories, and the basic models for doing so are

depicted in Figure 2.
   It is now possible to ex pand beyond broad population-level distin ctions such as demographics and

socio-economic indicators as the main classificati    on parameters, and include measures of greater
health relevancy to classify individuals into sp   ecialized cohorts. One example of cohort-relevant
measures is identifying those at high risk for t ype 2 diabetes based on genetic risk, hemoglobin A1c

levels [23], weight, BMI (body mass index), family      history, and smoking status, as opposed to not
having quantitative measures like genetic polymorphisms and blood risk data previously. Eventually,

this may lead to being able to focus precisely on    the unique health complex ity of individuals. More
granularity in classifying individuals into cohorts of health relevancy can       also be called typing,
extending models like the four blood type groups         into other areas. Some    examples are genetic

haplotype group, enterotype, and endotype.
J. Pers. Med. 2012, 2        102


                       Figure 2. Classification models in personalized medicine.















3.1.1. Genotyping and Haplotype Groups


   In genotyping, it was soon    realized that single mutations or SNPs do not account for much of
disease causality, perhaps only up to 5% [24]. However, it is currently thought that structural variation
(chunks of sequences that are deleted, repeat      ed, transposed, appear in another location,      etc.),

epigenetics (genetic changes that develop during an organism’s life) , and SNP mutations could all be
investigated together within the ensemble of haplot ype groups to explain more of disease causality.

A haplotype group is a collection of alleles that are transmitted together and may relate to different
health characteristics or disease  risk profiles. At present, haplot ype groups are being assessed for
diabetes [25], obesity [26], hypertension [27], and   immune disease (looking comprehensively at the

genes in the major histocompatibility complex (MHC)) [28].

3.1.2. Enterotyping the Microbiome


   Typing is also a technique used in the emergi      ng health data stream of the microbiome. The
microbiome provides numerous benefits without which we could not survive, including food digestion,

vitamin synthesis, metabolic regulation, immune system regulation, and pathogen resistance. Research
is now beginning to understand the important role     that the microbiome has in disease development,
drug response, and nutrient synthesis. Early work, not without controversy, has suggested that humans

may be classified into one of three microbiome en terotypes [29]. These ente rotypes are Bacteroides,
Prevotella, and in some cases, Ruminococcus [30]       . The enterotype indica tes which nutrients an

individual may be better at s ynthesizing, for example, B2, B5,      C, and H for those with a higher
prevalence of Bacteroides, and fo lic acid and vitamin B1 for those with a higher prevalence of
Prevotella [31]. Enterotype might be predictive       of diet and disease—a       higher prevalence of

Bacteroides is linked with a diet high in fat and   protein, and greater risk for obesity and metabolic
disease, while a higher prevalence of Prevotella is linked with a di et high in carbohydrates [31]. Two

recent projects have been launched to target the consumer market: the ‘Microbiome Profiling Response
to Probiotic in a Healthy Cohort’ from DIYgen omics and Second Genome, and the ‘What would you
do with your microbiome sequence?’ project from the Quantified Self and Pathogenica.
J. Pers. Med. 2012, 2        103


3.1.3. Endotyping Asthma

   Endotyping is the name of the similar typing tec hnique used in asthma, where subpopulations of

individuals with the condition ar    e defined based on molecular,        functional, or pathobiological
mechanisms. The approach allows individuals to be grouped into different treatments more effectively.

Asthma is broadly characterized by variable airf low obstruction, bronchial hyperresponsiveness, and
inflammation, however in any patient different symptoms may be predominant or absent. At least two

groups have proposed different      endotype classification systems    which could progress towards a
medical standard. Some of the endotypes suggested          relate to distinctions between eosinophilic,
neutrophilic, atopic, non- atopic, early onset, late onset, and as   pirin-sensitive or exercise-induced

asthma [32,33]. One challenge is th at the asthma endotypes are potenti ally less precise in assessment
than genetic haplotype groups or microbiomic entero types as they may be based on a wider range of

parameters including clinical characteristics, biomarkers, lung physiology, genetics, histopathology,
epidemiology, and treatment response.


3.2. Participatory Health Efforts

   The individual is a critical co mponent in realizing Health 2050 in the expanded concept of health

and health care (Figure 1) and in     the 80/20 notion of ad   dressing conditions while they are still
pre-clinical (Table 1). Participat ory health [21] or participant-centric initiatives [34] is a term

indicating the shift towards the empowerment of the individual and indicates that the individual is at
the center of action-taking related to health. One of the first uses of the idea of participatory health was
in 2008, as one of several terms being used inte rchangeably, including Health 2.0, Medicine 2.0, and

eHealth. The term meant “ use of a specific set of Web [2.0]     tools (blogs, podcasts, tagging, search,
wikis, etc.) by actors in hea   lth care including doctors, patients,   and scientists, … in order to

personalize health care, collaborate, and promote health education [35] .” The individual was now as
equally disposed as professionals to action-taking    through social media to personalize health care.

From this foundation, a more significant move       came in 2010 when the Society for Participatory
Medicine, itself a new orga nization, declared that “ Participatory Medicine is a movement in which

networked patients shift from being mere passengers       to responsible drivers of their health, and in
which providers encourage and value them as full partners [36]         .” Individuals were now seen as

instigators and drivers of their own health in all respects, not just through social media.
   Since then, a wide ecosystem of participatory h ealth efforts has begun, offering individuals diverse
participation possibilities from light to intensiv  e engagement as depicted in Table 2 [37]. Such

participatory health efforts include social media, health applications on the mobile phone, personal
electronic health records, health social networks, direct-to-consumer tests such as genomic and blood

tests, and crowdsourced health collaboration and experimentation communities.

          Table 2. Participatory health activities ranging from light to intensive engagement.

              (Light)                Level of Participant Engagement                (Intensive)
                   Mobile Phone    Personal Health      Health Social       Consumer      Crowdsourced
   Social Media
                   Health Apps     Records (PHRs)     Networks (HSNs)       Genomics      Health Studies
J. Pers. Med. 2012, 2        104


3.2.1. Social Media

   Social media refers to using the usual lightwei     ght Internet-based platforms for online search,
messaging, media consumption, and social networ        king for health-related purposes. Some of the

standard social media include blogs, Twitter, Facebook, Google+, wikis, search, and video sites. Social
media serves as an innovative, valuable, and incr easingly standardized communication tool for health

information dissemination, real-time feedback, mu lti-party interaction, and other uses. A 2011 Pew
Internet study found that 80% of Internet users look for health information online, 27% of U.S. Internet
users had tracked health data online, and 18% had sought to locate others with similar health concerns

via the Internet [12]. These statistics suggest that health empowerment and action-taking is becoming a
mainstream behavioral norm as opposed to the limited activity of a small group of health enthusiasts.


3.2.2. Mobile Phone Health Apps

   The importance of mobile phone hea lth applications cannot be overe mphasized in realizing Health

2050: Preventive Medicine. The number of worldwid e smartphone users is expected to exceed one
billion by 2013 [38]. Application downloads grew        explosively from 300 million in 2009 to five
billion in 2010, and over 7,000 apps       are health-related [39]. The    principal consumer uses of

smartphone health applications ar e for education, information, and se lf-tracking of diverse physical
and mental conditions.

   Mobile platforms and health applications are also     useful to medical professionals for real-time
communication, information access, and telemedi          cine. 81% of U.S. physicians are using
smartphones [40], and 62% of those surveyed in one study are using the iPad professionally [41]. The

hurdles are not technical but st   ructural, as of March 2011, only       12 U.S. states were offering
reimbursement for telemedicine se rvices (e.g., telephone, email, video consultation), and at lower

reimbursement percentages than traditional in-office visits [42]. Now more payers and states are
starting to approve telemedicine reimbursement      and Health 2.0 companies such as HealthTap are
launching sleek smartphone applic ations for private medical cons       ultation [43]. This could be a

floodgate of cost savings for the industry and a much better use of physician time as it is estimated that
70% of physician consultations could be handled by phone [44]. Regarding so cial media, one study

found that physicians are using social media, 87% for personal use and 67% for professional use [45],
while another found that 20% of physicians emaile d with patients and 6% co mmunicated with them

through social media [46], mostly preferring to decline Facebook friend invitations, for example.
   Aside from consumers and medical professionals, health research is another beneficiary of the new
era of social media and mobile phone apps. The       sheer number of mobile phone users has already

offered the possibility for research efforts to s cale up by at least an order of magnitude. In one
example, thousands of worldwide study participants (4,157) were recruited within months, as opposed

to the few hundred that could be targeted previously on a more cost-limited basis [38].

3.2.3. Personal Health Records (PHRs)

   Personal health records (PHRs) are medical records owned and administered by patients rather than

health care professionals. They ma y contain the same information as traditional medical records such
J. Pers. Med. 2012, 2        105


as blood type, family and personal health history, and prescription information, as well as new kinds of
data like personal genome profiles. PHRs are typically online, with pa tients administering the records
and granting specific permissions to different health care providers as needed. PHRs are a key step in

empowering health self-management as we can have a more active role in understanding, accessing,
maintaining, and sharing our personal health information, and in coor dinating and participating in our

own health care. One health provider found that      PHR users were 68% better at following up on
recommended care than non-PHR users [47], indicating the potentially useful behavioral influences of
PHRs. Additional aspects of PHRs re garding the integration of inform ation from various health data

streams were discussed earlier in Section 2.2.

3.2.4. Health Social Networks (HSNs)


   Health social networks (HSNs) are online health interest communities where individuals may find
and discuss information about conditions, symptoms , and treatments, provide and receive support,

enter and monitor data, and join he alth studies [48]. Health social networks cater to both the general
public (e.g., MedHelp, PatientsLikeMe, and Daily      Strength) and specific groups (e.g., Tudiabetes,
Asthmapolis). They may be consumer-focused          or physician-focused (e.g., Sermo, Ozmosis, and

RadRounds) [21]. More recently, drug health social        networks have arisen such as Treato and
eHealthMe to find out how other patients have responded to specific medications and therapeutics. The

shared aggregated data of individua ls contributing to hea lth social networks creates a valuable public
good which can benefit populations on the whole.

3.2.5. Consumer Genomics


   Consumer genomics is part of the more general tre nd of health-related tests being available directly
to consumers. Unbeknownst to many people, consumer blood tests, for example from DirectLabs and

the Life Extension Foundation, have long been available directly to consumers via the Internet without
a traditional doctor’s office visit. Consumer genomi cs had a big impact when test kits were made
available directly to consumers in the 2007 time frame and some medical professionals raised concern.

After ongoing regulatory involvement, consumer genomic        s tests continue to be available in most
industrialized countries from a variety of pr   oviders (e.g., 23andMe, deC ODEme, Navigenics, and

Pathway Genomics, though the latter two require a      physician consultation) and have approximately
150,000–200,000 total subscribers [49].

   Consumer genomics is notable in that this was one of the first     times that significant amounts of
health-related data became available directly to      individuals without the mediation of medical
professionals. Despite ongoing concerns regarding th     e utility and interpretiv e validity of personal

genomic information [50], the advent of the c       onsumer genome was an important milestone in
individual empowerment towards h ealth data, and engendered a cr         itical maturation point in the

mindsets of subscribing individuals, particularly regardi ng access and ownership ri ghts to the health
data of the individual. Other effort s related to health data ownershi p and sharing have been inspired
such as “That’s My Data!” where patients share thei r genetic data with researchers in exchange for

open access to the results [51]. The current status of consumer genomics is that there is a perception
that probabilistic risk information for health cond itions remains difficult to make actionable, while
J. Pers. Med. 2012, 2        106


drug response genomics is increasingly useful. As of July 2012, the FDA has validated genetic testing
for over one hundred drugs [52].

3.2.6. Crowdsourced Health Studies


   Crowdsourced health studies and quantified self-e xperimentation projects conducted individually
and in groups are emerging as an important comple          ment to traditional clinical trials and other

established mechanisms of health knowledge generation. In these studies and projects, participants are
crowdsourced via meetup groups or the Internet, i.e., recruited in vast open calls using social media
and other techniques allowing indivi duals to self-select participati on. Crowdsourced health research

studies may be organized by traditional institutiona l researchers, non-professional researchers, or by
the study participants themselves. Integrating se    lf-tracking device data and crowdsourced health

experimentation results into persona l electronic health records for    an overall picture of preventive
health is an important medical challenge. There ar e many potential benefits to crowdsourced research

studies. They are seen as complementary to traditional studies where the Internet serves as a barometer
for surfacing salient information via crowdsourced        health studies with preliminarily interesting
findings that could then be further investigated in traditional studies [21]. Crowdsourced studies are the

venture capital round of health research studies.

3.3. Era of Big Health Data


   Big data is an important contemporary trend, comparable in impact to the personal computer or the
Internet, that is reshaping the employment econo my and many industries including health. Data is
growing at 50% a year, or more than doubling every two years [53]. Some of the challenges are that it

is not yet possible in all cases to determine which data are of     relevance, how much data should be
stored, and how it should be made accessible. ‘B       ig data’ refers to the   collection of voluminous

amounts (e.g., petabytes and exabytes) of a variety of unstructured and semi-structured data that is now
possible, cheap, and occurring in    most sectors of the economy. Anal yzing the data (analytics) and
information visualization (data viz) therefore b ecome immediately critical for churning through the

large data sets to produce meaningful insights.

3.3.1. Search and Social Media Aggregation of Health Information


   There are a number of big health data applications already in use. One of the most basic is scraping
Internet content for health information. Search companies Google and Yahoo tr ack trends in search

data on health topics. Some of this information ha     s been turned into projects such as Google Flu
Trends and a Yahoo research effort regarding in        formation needs when experiencing grief [54].
However, one analysis noted that these methods (e.g., analyzing sear ch data) may be problematic—in

the flu case, search results were predictive of     flu symptoms, but not actual cases [55]. Beyond
aggregating the behavior of indivi duals on the Internet with regard     to health to assess the type and

level of concerns (using search keywords as a pr oxy), public health surveillance is another application
area for big health data.
J. Pers. Med. 2012, 2        107


   In public health surveillance, re searchers process news and social media for information insights.
One example is the Health Map Data project, w        ith over six years of worl dwide data concerning
infectious disease outbreaks. The information is     made available via a mobile phone application,

Outbreaks Near Me. The method was used to successf ully elicit epidemiological patterns in a cholera
outbreak in Haiti [56]. A new effort by the group, Flu    Near You, is intended to track the patterns of

how the flu develops and spreads across communities . Other similar public health surveillance efforts
include Sickweather, tracking disease through social media chatter, and Transform Health, intending to
provide real-time maps of human health a              nd illness with mobile        phone applications.

Geolocation-aware mobile crowdsourcing applications may also facilitate public health surveillance,
disaster reporting, and ongoing res ponse and information collection for any variety of health-related

issues [57]. Underl ining the importance of effective ligh      tweight applications for public health
surveillance, a government-sponsored hackathon chal lenge took place in the U.S. in June 2012. The

Now Trending Challenge led by the U.S. Office of          the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and
Response (ASPR) sought web-based applications us ing Twitter to identify tr ending illnesses [58].
Like the flu search trends projects , public health surveillance data proj ectswillneedtobeassessed

for accuracy.

3.3.2. Using Big Health Data for Preventive Prediction


   Big health data applications pertain to both ins titutional and crowdsourced efforts. Health service
providers and insurers are mining biomedical inform ation as a strategic imperative in running their
operations. One example is a health data analytics company, OptumIns ight, arising from a large U.S.

health care company, UnitedHealth Group. Big data       analysis techniques were applied to 90 million
health claims and associated data during th    e 1993–2012 period to make predictions about illness

occurrence and treatment n eeds in other similar patients. Even a few simple factors such as weight,
BMI, smoking, and family history were shown to be predictive for diabetes.
   Big data together with crowdsourcing and the emergence of new models such as prediction markets

(a mechanism for capturing group opini on) is the Iowa Electronic Heal th Markets. At this website,
individuals may register their op   inion in real-time regarding the    scope, spread, and duration of

epidemics and other health events. A related site, Kaggle, offers the ability to post and compete in data
science challenges. Crowdsourced participants analy ze large data sets to predict hospital admittance

rates, consumer behavior, and sales forecasts. The Kaggle data science projects have just begun and
results are not available yet, but crowdsourcing       has proven successful in other biological data
challenges like FoldIt, a computer-based game fo       r tackling the complexities of protein folding.

Gamers took just days to solve a monkey virus re         troviral protease structur e [59] and found an
18-fold-more-active version of a m odel enzyme [60]. Another projec t used mobile phones to collect

large amounts of crowdsourced health reporting data in a participatory epidemiology project [61].
   Big health data applications are important in th   e realization of preventive medicine at both the
macro and micro level. At the macro level, they provi de the capability to track health-related issues at

the vast scale of worldwide populations in low-cost ways. This is useful both directly for planning and
immediate response to outbreaks and other situations, and indirectly in creating a large longitudinal

dataset of health-related information as a public resource. At the micro level, the passive data
J. Pers. Med. 2012, 2        108


collection activities of always-on self-tracking     devices can help indivi    duals to establish both
quantitative and qualitative baseline and variability understandings of a variety of health-related issues
and behaviors, and the technologies can make ambi ent inquiries and subtle suggestions, for example

querying as to why someone may have less physical activity this week than last.

3.4. Change in Philosophical Mindset and Other Qualitative Shifts


   The realization of Health 2050: Preventive Medici ne is both quantitative and qualitative. Not only
are there new advances in the quantitative ways of     science, but the qualitative meaning of the new
tools and knowledge is equally im     portant. There is a subjective di   mension of concerns such as

mindset, experience, emotion, ethics , values, and culture at the leve     ls of the individual, family,
community, and society that is outside of the realm of reason, science, a system, or some other form of

objective truth. A simple example of a developing shif t in a subjective domain is the paradigm of the
old thinking ‘My health is the responsibility of my physician,’ being replaced by the new thinking that

‘My health is my responsibility, and I have the tools to manage it.’

3.4.1. Overview of Participatory Health Communities

   Participatory health studies in crowdsour      ced cohorts, health social networks, and        n = 1

self-experimentation communities is a growing trend. As of July 2012, one high-profile health social
network, PatientsLikeMe, had over 157,000 community members participating in 1,000 conditions.

Consumer genomics community 23andMe had over 150,000 subscribers [49]. Genomera, a personal
health collaboration platform where community me mbers (both professional researchers and citizen
scientists) operate studies had over 25 studies listed and 800 communi ty members ready to participate

in crowdsourced studies with genotypic and phenotypic informati on. The Quantified Self community
is a fast-developing movement where both health en        thusiasts and diagnosed patients meet in an

environment of trust to share the quantified self-tracking projects they have been doing in the format of
monthly show-and-tell groups. As of July 2012, the Quantified Self community had 65 worldwide
meetup groups with thousands of pa rticipants after only f our years of existence, and a third annual

conference planned for September 2012.
   A number of forces are uniting to facilitate participatory health including the emergence of trust and

empowerment in Internet-based social networking communities together with low-cost newly available
technology like genome sequencing a nd bio-monitoring applications and devices. How an individual

understands his or herself in rega rd to health and h ealth research is ch anging. In the past, n equaled
someone else, the population average, which may or        may not apply on an individual basis; now,
‘n = me’ and the information a pplies directly [62]. Further, there is the idea of ‘ n = we’ developing as

self-experimenting, self-empowered individuals come together in health collaboration communities
like the Quantified Self, DIYgenomics, PatientsLikeMe, and Genomera to make their       n = 1 discoveries

less anomalous, statistically significant, and scientifically rigorous [62]. The definition of what it is to
be a biocitizen in the modern world is cha        nging, and starting to incl   ude data-sharing, study
participation, and more proactive health self-management and responsibility-taking.
J. Pers. Med. 2012, 2        109


3.4.2. Motivations of Crowdsourced Study Participants

   Uncovering the motivations and experience of individuals engaged in participatory health initiatives
is one way to understand the qual itative shifts occurri ng in Health 2050: Pr eventive Medicine, and

suggests that the phenomenon is not restricted to health enthusiasts but rather extends to the population
more generally. In one of the first studies where participants organized a research effort and published

their results, personal statements were specifica lly included as a qualita tive dimension. The study
examined genetic variation, vitamin B serum levels,     and the impact of the passive versus the active
formulation of vitamin B supplementation, and found that baseline blood levels were more likely to be

out-of-bounds for those with a genetic mutation        and that a simple drugstore multivitamin was
successful for most in quickly remedying the condition [63].

   The personal statements collected as part       of this DIYgenomics vitamin B study addressed
motivating factors for participating in the study,   reaction to study results, and resulting behavioral

changes. Participation motivations included wanting to understand        how personal    genetic profiles
related to serum vitamin levels and interventions, wanting to determine generally if there was a benefit
to taking vitamins, and exploring ho w to use personal genomic data to make positive health changes.

Reactions to the findings were noting that not everyone responded in a similar manner to the same
intervention, disappointment at the lack of information regarding which vitamins might be appropriate

for different genotypes, and surp    rise at how quickly and effectively the interventions worked.
Regarding ongoing behavioral change, nearly all participants noted intended modifications, specifically
continuing to take the supplement that was most effec tive on an individual basis, greater adherence to

supplementation programs, and interest in furt      her experimentation. Two      years after the study
completion, several study pa rticipants continue to incorporate th eir personalized experimental results

in daily regimens. Perhaps the most interesting re sult of psychological and philosophical importance
reflected in the personal statements was surprise at the depth of the personal im pact even in a fairly
simple study. Participants noted that published study results from trad itional clinical trials were not at

all necessarily the best intervention on a personal   basis, and commented on the value of the study
results in ongoing personal health self-management.


3.4.3. Quantified Self Study: Are New Forms of Knowledge Being Generated?

   A next level of investigating th e qualitative shifts in Health 2050 towards personalized preventive

medicine is asking more probing philosophical questions about the knowledge-generation that is taking
place. The first point to examine is whether, in fact, new kinds of knowledge are being derived from
personal experimentation and group collaboration, or if it is the sa me kind of knowledge, just being

derived differently. The second point is how to char acterize and describe the knowledge that is being
generated in participatory health efforts. Th    ird is to understand how the knowledge is being

understood, appropriated, and made actionable by i ndividuals, and what this means from a personal
and societal perspective for the emerging biocitizen.
   A study examining these questions is the DIYgenomics epistemology study: ‘Knowledge generation

through self-experimentation.’ One outcome from the study is to be able to develop an epistemology of
citizen science that can provide a structure and context for participant-derived health knowledge, and
J. Pers. Med. 2012, 2        110


more broadly-articulate, formalize, and validate knowledge derived from any citizen science project. A
central hypothesis is that knowle    dge derived from self-experiment ation, or even from personal
genomic data or self-tracking gadgets, is qualitat    ively different than trad itionally obtained health

knowledge. First, in the past, health data were        nearly always mediated,     often paternalistically,
conservatively, and normatively, by medical professionals. Second, the type of data is new—previously

data was not typically sought or relayed unless it pertained to a diagnosis or treatment in the context of
clinical conditions and their remedy. Now, in the      always-on health information climate, reams of
potentially irrelevant data are collected passively and must be orchestrated and reviewed for personal

health relevance in the complex game of preventive medicine where the connection between individual
data points and micro-behaviors is not obviously correlated with di agnosed conditions or immediate

action-taking. Third, as seen in th   e personal statements of partic ipatory study part icipants above,
today’s health knowledge is fundamentally different in its level of personal applicability and relevance.

When information is obtained directly through self -experimentation as opposed to from a doctor who
is relating published study results that have general effectiveness at the population level but not at the
individual level, the meaning is    significantly different, and translates much more expediently to

behavioral change, and the empowerment of the biocitizen.

3.4.4. Quantified Self Study Results


   In the DIYgenomics knowledge generation study, part        icipants are asked to complete an online
questionnaire regarding their quantified self-experimentation projects in any area of activity. Projects
are often regarding health, time-management, stre ss-reduction, nutrition, ex ercise, mood, and sleep

optimization. The preliminary results are already in formative. Self-experimentation projects typically
fall into two categories. Most projects have been fairly short-term (e.g., on average two months) for the

purpose of addressing a particular issue, often with the desired outcome being a quality-of-life
improvement. The other category of projects is periodic longitudinal data collection for the purpose of
establishing and monitoring ba     seline norms, and conducting ongoi       ng health management and

optimization. There are three common and notable aspects about the quantified self-experimentation
efforts. First, experimenters tend to define a clear outcome at     the beginning (e.g., improve sleep).

Second, they iterate rapidly through many different      interventions, and possibly approaches, whilst
tracking the effectiveness of each. Third, experiment    ers generally achieve some sort of result that

either solves the issue or provides some other endpoi nt or moment for recasting the experimentation.
The tone of participant experience narratives is practical rather than introspective, and, having resolved
an issue, a participant may even forget what it was like having that issue.

   Many participants in quantified self projects are aware of the potential limitations of their efforts
and try to adjust for this. In one example, an expe rimenter was particularly rigorous with dosages and

times of testing, much more so than he would have been in an institutionally-run study, due in part to
the self-funded nature of the experime nt. Another tried to be as scien tifically accurate as possible in
tracking and experimental methods so that the results would not be anecdotal. Experimenters found the

accuracy of data results to have high fidelity and personal meaning. Participants noted that more data,
better tools, sharing with others , and lower costs for blood tests and other measurement validation

would be potential improvements to their experi       mentation capability. Some of the outcomes for
J. Pers. Med. 2012, 2        111


experimenters were one individual finding that optimal vitamin c onsumption varied depending on the
time of year, another that niacin contributed to     managing cholesterol levels , and another that diet
specificities may be cont ributing to acne development. Others succeeded in improving sleep quality,

one by finding that caffeine intake wa s the most critical influencing fa ctor, and another that slightly
inclining the mattress resolved the issue as opposed to many other e xperimental interventions related

to caffeine and alcohol consumption, light and television exposure, and the timing of going to bed.

3.4.5. Participatory Health Pioneers Are Defining the Preventive Medicine Mindset

   While criticism has been levied against quantif ied self-experimentation and crowdsourced health

study participation as being the special-interest activities of a small minority of those particularly, and
potentially obsessively, interested in health tr acking and improvement, it can be argued that these

pioneers are critical in f  acilitating the widespread realization    of preventive medicine. It is the
‘Wikipedia-ization of health’ as a small number        of contributors join to create a public good of

extensive and universal value. In technological and social movements, early adopters not only pave the
way at the practical level, innova ting tools and experiment al processes so that they can be made
cost-efficient and codified into effective means for attaining results, but also at the qualitative level.

Early adopters help to make new ideas and t          echniques known as initially being strange and
preposterous, but then more commonplace as a se           nsibility and maturity develops, and value

propositions become defined to different audi        ences. Self-awareness, se lf-tracking, monitoring,
experimenting, and action-taking are critical components in the preventive medicine movement, and
early adopters, health hackers, and gene geeks are e xpected to innovate at the radical edge as the first

step towards mainstream adoption. The full path to       the realization of the personalized preventive
medicine of the future is just starting to be defi ned, and the way forward will likely be elucidated by

innovators, both institutional and individual, and then expanded as other groups see and implement the
value for themselves.

3.5. Limitations


   There are a number of reasons that Health 2050:       Preventive Medicine might not happen which
range from institutional change to human behavioral psychology. Some of the most important can be

grouped into five categories: tech nical feasibility, prior ity, human nature, timing, and criticisms of
participatory preventive health models. First and fore    most is technical feasibility in the sense that

health research generally, whether     institutional or partic ipatory efforts, has not been effective at
finding solutions to the most complex health challe      nges (a recent high-profile example is cancer
immunotherapy). An earlier example discussed was that of genomics, that SNP analysis so far has

accounted for less than 5% of disease causality [     24], and epigenetics and structural variation may
explain more, but are not likely to offer a short ride to translational therapies. Many other therapies and

research have not led directly to cures, but       rather to a slowly accruing understanding of the
complexities of biology. There is little idea in   some cases such as complex common disease how
comprehensively effective interventions may be de       veloped. The detailed nature of the underlying

biology and its adaptive dynamical behavior—biology itself—is one of the biggest barriers to progress.
There is nothing inherent in preventive medicine and participatory health to indicate that these models
J. Pers. Med. 2012, 2        112


would be any more be successful th an traditional models. However, it also does not seem that nothing
would be learned from having orders-of-magnitude mo re data and participants at every stage of a
pathology’s development, and that these new resources could eventually facilitate the resolution of

challenging health problems.
   Second, preventive medicine may not be seen as a pr iority, or as a way to resolve other seemingly

more pressing challenges such as the high cost of health care, agi ng populations, and systemic health
issues where answers do not seem to be forthcomi ng. The tremendous growth in lifestyle diseases like
the worldwide ‘diabesity’ epidemic may prove to be too intractable for preventive medicine to have an

impact. Third, preventive medicine may not work due to human nature. Since we are human, behavior
change is extremely difficult, a nd we experience the world more th rough narratives th an rationality.

We think in certain ways where      it is hard to get anyone focuse d on a longer-term problem, or on
statistical or probabilistic data [64]. We need social narratives, stories, and poetry to promulgate health

maintenance and behavioral change, likely together with financial incentives. Programs like Safeway’s
paying employees to maintain or improve health have been demonstrated to be effective [65], but have
not become widespread. The effect of other initiatives remains to be seen such as the New York soda

ban (on soft drinks more than      16 ounces in size) [   66], and the impact of     a recently-approved
anti-obesity drug [67].

   Fourth, there could be a timing i ssue with preventive medicine. It might be too early, both in the
curve of technology development (many of the rele       vant technologies are st ill expensive and under
development (e.g., whole human genome sequencing, a nd microbiome, transcriptome, and epigenetic

profiling)), and since science has not yet translat   ed these emerging data streams into deployable
preventive medicine interventions. Additionally, another dimension, mindset and cultural milieu is

similarly not yet focused on wellness maintenance and preventive medicine as a core goal that may be
achieved with relatively simple programs. Finally, criticisms and identifications of the problematic
aspects of participatory preventive health models have arisen including the conduct, quality, necessity,

and oversight of these efforts [21].

4. Conclusion


   It cannot be underscored how fundamentally the           health landscape may need to change to
accommodate Health 2050: Preventive Medicine. Numerous scientific, information technology,

mindset, and institutional changes are needed. The atte mpted descriptions here of the wider concept of
health and health care (Figure 1), and the focus on the 80% of the life cycle of a condition when it is
still pre-clinical and perhaps avoida ble (Table 1) comprise a nascent sketch of how to begin. What is

encouraging is that growth is already evident in di fferent areas of the preventive medicine ecosystem.
One example of the expanded concept of health in action is the distincti on businesses are making by

defining themselves as being in either the wellness or medical sector. Consumers too are more active,
and engagement in participatory he alth efforts could continue to gr ow as devices, applications, and
other technologies make data co llection, health-monitoring, and behavior change easy, inexpensive,

and unobtrusive. The growth of big h ealth data streams generated both by institutions and individuals
could facilitate the greater use of typing groups akin to blood type groups, and predictive profiling for

early warnings of out-of-baseline variation. Crowdsourced health studies conducted individually and in
J. Pers. Med. 2012, 2        113


groups are emerging as an important complement to       traditional clinical trials and other established
forms of health knowledge genera     tion. Qualitative changes in mindset may be a forerunner to
institutional recasting as individuals increasingly ta ke the responsibility to self-manage health in a

more empowered proactive manner. The individual has become the central focal point in health, which
is now seen as a systemic complexity of wellness and prevention, as opposed to an isolated condition

or pathology. Not only is scientific advance critical, but also the philosophical and cultural context for
moving away from the fix-it-with-a-pill mentality to the empowered role of the biocitizen in achieving
the personalized preventive medicine of the future.


Acknowledgements

   The author would like to acknowledge DIYgenomic s/Genomera crowdsourced study participants,

particularly in the ‘Vitamin B-9 and MTHFR            variants’ and ‘Knowledge     generation through
self-experimentation’ studies.


Conflict of Interest

   The author is the founder of DIYgenomics which ha s twelve crowdsourced health research studies
in ongoing open enrollment as of July 2012, and serves    as an advisor to the he alth collaboration and

study operation company Genomera.

References


1.   Kaiser Family Foundation. Health care            costs: A primer. 2012. Available online:
     http://www.kff.org/insurance/upload/7670-03.pdf (accessed on 25 July 2012).
2.   OECD. Health at a glance 2011: OECD indicators. 2011. Available online: http://www.oecd.org/

     dataoecd/12/16/49084355.pdf (accessed on 25 July 2012).
3.   Begley, S. Is healthy weight impossible for many Americans? 2012. Thomson Reuters. Available

     online: http://today.msnbc.msn.com/id/          47337275/ns/today-today_health/t/healthy-weight-
     impossible-many-americans/#.T-_d-fUkKSp (accessed on 25 July 2012).
4.   Voice of America. Populations are ag              ing worldwide. 2009. Available online:

     http://www.voanews.com/content/a-13-2005-11-30v     -oa69/397115.html (accessed on 25 July 2012).
5.   Gavura, S. What does a new drug cost?               Sci. Based Med.      2011. Available online:

     http://www.sciencebasedmedicine.org/index.php/what-does-a-new-drug-cost/ (accessed on
     25 July 2012).

6.   Himmelstein, D.U.; Thorne, D.; Warren, E.; Woolha ndler, S. Medical bankr uptcy in the United
     States, 2007: Results of a national study. Am. J. Med. 2009, 122, 741–746.
7.   Hood, L. Lee Hood. Nat. Biotechnol. 2011, 29, doi:10.1038/nbt.1809.

8.   National Cancer Institute. Personalized medicine. Dictionary of cancer terms. Available online:
     http://www.cancer.gov/dictionary?cdrid=561717 (accessed on 25 July 2012).

9.   Herper, M. Government unveils first ma p of all the germs in the human body.         Forbes 2012.
     Available online: http://www.forbes.com/site     s/matthewherper/2012/06/13/government-unveils-
     first-map-of-all-the-germs-in-the-human-body/ (accessed on 25 July 2012).
J. Pers. Med. 2012, 2       114


10. Voineagu, I.; Wang, X.; Johnston, P.; Lowe, J.K.; Tian, Y.; Horvath, S.; Mill, J.; Cantor, R.M.;
     Blencowe, B.J.; Geschwind, D.H. Transcriptomic analysis of au tistic brain reveals convergent
     molecular pathology. Nature 2011, 474, 380–384.

11. Hueber, W.; Kidd, B.A.; Tomooka, B.H.; Lee, B.        J.; Bruce, B.; Fries, J.F.; Sønderstrup, G.;
     Monach, P.; Drijfhout, J.W.; van Venrooij, W.J.;        et al. Antigen microarray profiling of

     autoantibodies in rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheum. 2005, 52, 2645–2655.
12. Fox, S. Pew Research Center’s Internet and Amer       ican Life Project. The social life of health
     information 2011. Available online: http://www.pe      wInternet.org/Reports/2011/Social-Life-of-

     Health-Info.aspx (accessed on 25 July 2012).
13. Leong, C. TedMed highlights: Here’s to the futu re of health and medicine. 2012. Massive Health

     Blog. Available online: http     ://blog.massivehealth.com/post/21793580940/tedmed-highlights-
     heres-to-the-future-of-health-and (accessed on 25 July 2012).

14. Cattriona citing Medline Plus/National Librar y of Medicine. 20 million people in the United
     States. askville by Amazon 2011. Available online: http://askville.amazon.com/percentage-people-
     USA-suffering-depression/

     AnswerViewer.do?requestId=7150700 (accessed on 25 July 2012).
15. Foreman, A.C.; Hall, C.; Bone, K.; Cheng, J.; Kaplin, A. Just text me: Using SMS technology for

     collaborative patient mood charting. J. Participat. Med. 2011, 3, e45.
16. Harrison, V.; Proudfoot, J.; Wee, P.P.; Parker, G.   ; Pavlovic, D.H.; Manicavasagar, V. Mobile
     mental health: Review of the emerging field and proof of concept study. J. Ment. Health 2011, 20,

     509–524.
17. Trudeau, M. Mental health apps: Like a             ‘Therapist In Your Pocket.’ 2010. NPR.

     Available online: http://www.npr.org/templa tes/story/story.php?storyId=127081326 (accessed on
     25 July 2012).
18. Swan, M. Scaling crowdsourced health studies: The emergence of a new form of contract research

     organization. Pers. Med. 2012, 9, 223–234.
19. Wilbanks, J. Portable legal consent and consent to research. 2012. TED Glob. http://weconsent.us/

     (accessed on 25 July 2012).
20. Rognlin, B. The easiest food journa l you’ll ever keep: The eatery.     Blisstree 2012. Available

     online: http://blisstree.com/eat/n utrition/food-journal-app-the-eatery-weight-loss-733/ (accessed
     on 25 July 2012).
21. Swan, M. Crowdsourced health research studies: An important emerging complement to clinical

     trials in the public hea   lth research ecosystem.    J. Med. Internet Res.      2012, 14, e46,
     doi:10.2196/jmir.1988.

22. Zeff, A. New BD Veritor™ Syst em for Rapid Detection of Flu A+B Receives 510(k) Clearance
     and CLIA Waiver. 2012. Becton Dickin                    son Company. Available online:
     http://www.bd.com/contentmanager/b_article.asp?Item_ID=26567&ContentType_ID=1&Busines

     sCode=20001&d=BD+Worldwide&s=&dTitle=&dc=&dcTitle= (accessed on 25 July 2012).
23. Heianza, Y.; Arase, Y.; Fujihara, K.; Tsuji, H.; Saito, K.; Hsieh, S.; Kodama, S.; Shimano, H.;

     Yamada, N.; Hara, S.;        et al . High normal HbA(1c) levels           were associated with
     impaired insulin secret ion without escalating insulin resist ance in Japanese individuals: The
J. Pers. Med. 2012, 2       115


     Toranomon Hospital Health Manage ment Center Study 8 (TOPICS 8).              Diabet. Med. 2012,
     doi:10.1111/j.1464-5491.2012.03667.x
24. Manolio, T.A.; Collins, F.S.; Cox, N.J.; Goldstein, D.B.; Hindorff, L.A.; Hunter, D.J.;

     McCarthy, M.I.; Ramos, E.M.; Cardon, L.R.; Chakravarti, A.;          et al . Finding the missing
     heritability of complex diseases. Nature 2009, 461, 747–753.

25. González, A.M.; Maceira, B.M.; Pérez, E.; Cabrer a, V.M.; López, A.J.; Larruga, J.M. Genetics,
     environment, and diabetes-related end-stage renal disease in the Canary Islands. Genet. Test. Mol.
     Bioma. 2012, 16, 859–886.

26. Santos, J.L.; de la Cruz, R.; Holst, C.; Grau, K.; Naranjo, C.; Maiz, A.; Astrup, A.; Saris, W.H.;
     MacDonald, I.; Oppert, J.M.; et al. Allelic variants of melanocor tin 3 receptor gene (MC3R) and

     weight loss in obesity: a randomised trial of hypo-energetic high- versus low-fat diets. PLoS One
     2011, 6, e19934.

27. Sun, B.; Chamarthi, B.; Williams, J.S.; Krug, A. W.; Lasky-Su, J.; Raby, B.A.; Hopkins, P.N.;
     Jeunemaitre, X.; Ferri, C.; Williams, G.H. Diff   erent polymorphisms of the mineralocorticoid
     receptor gene are associated with either gl       ucocorticoid or mineralocorticoid levels in

     hypertension. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 2012, doi:10.1210/jc.2012-1486.
28. Vandiedonck, C.; Taylor, M.S.; Lockstone, H.E.         ; Plant, K.; Taylor, J.M.; Durrant, C.;

     Broxholme, J.; Fairfax, B.P.; Knight, J.C.            Pervasive haplotypic variation in the
     spliceo-transcriptome of the human major histocompatibility complex.      Genome Res. 2011, 21,
     1042–1054.

29. Arumugam, M.; Raes, J.; Pelletier, E.; Le Paslier, D.; Yamada, T.; Mende, D.R.; Fernandes, G.R.;
     Tap, J.; Bruls, T.; Batto, J.M.; et al. Enterotypes of the human gut microbiome. Nature 2011, 473,

     174–180.
30. Willingham, E. Which of the three gut types are you? 2011.                                EarthSky.
     Available online: http://earth        sky.org/human-world/which-of-the-three-gut-types-are-you/

     (accessed on 25 July 2012).
31. NewTime. Microbiome—Beings who live in us            , controlling our lives. Finding the World.

     Available online: http://www.findingthewor             ld.com/microbiome-beings-who-live-in-us-
     controlling-our-lives/ (accessed on 25 July 2012).

32. Poon, A.H.; Hamid, Q. Personalized medici ne for asthma: Are we there yet? Ann. Thorac. Med.
     2012, 7, 55–56.
33. Lötvall, J.; Akdis, C.A.; Bacharier, L.B.; Bjermer, L.; Casale, T.B.; Custovic, A.;

     Lemanske, R.F., Jr.; Wardlaw, A.J.; Wenzel,        S.E.; Greenberger, P.A. Asthma endotypes:
     A new approach to classifica       tion of disease entities with     in the asthma syndrome.

     J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 2011, 127, 355–360.
34. Kaye, J.; Curren, L.; Anderson, N.; Edwards, K.; Fullerton, S.M.; Kanellopoulou, N.;
     Lund, D.; MacArthur, D.G.; Mascalzoni, D.; Shepherd, J.;        et al. From patients to partners:

     Participant-centric initiatives in biomedical research. Nat. Rev. Genet. 2012, 13, 371–376.
35. Hughes, B.; Joshi, I.; Wareham, J. Health 2.0 and medicine 2.0: Tensions and controversies in the

     field. J. Med. Internet Res. 2008, 10, e23.
J. Pers. Med. 2012, 2       116


36. Frydman, G. A Patient-Centric       Definition of Participatory   Medicine. 2010. e-patients.net.
     Available online: http://e-pa           tients.net/archives/2010/04/a-patient-centric-definition-of-
     participatory-medicine.html (accessed on 25 July 2012).

37. Swan, M. The future of health: An overview of         participant-driven research and medicine.
     Presented at Interpharma 37th Health Seminar,      Lausanne, Switzerland, November 10, 2011.

     Available online: http://www.slideshare.net/labl   ogga/participant-drivenhealth (accessed on
     25 July 2012).
38. Dufau, S.; Duñabeitia, J.A.; Moret-Tatay, C.; McGonigal, A.; Peeters, D.; Alario, F.X.;

     Balota, D.A.; Brysbaert, M.; Carreiras, M.; Ferrand, L.;     et al . Smart phone, smart science:
     How the use of smartphones can revoluti onize research in cognitive science. PLoS One 2011,

     6, e24974.
39. Boulos, M.N.; Wheeler, S.; Tavare s, C.; Jones, R. How smartphones are changing the face of

     mobile and participatory healthcare: An          overview, with example from eCAALYX.
     Biomed. Eng. Online 2011, 10, doi:10.1186/1475-925X-10-24.
40. Kiser, K. 25 ways to use your sm                         artphone. Physicians share their

     favorite uses and apps.                      Minn. Med.        2011. Available online:
     http://www.minnesotamedicine.com/Default.aspx?tabid=3724 (accessed on 25 July 2012).

41. Emily. US Physicians Adopt iPad in Record        Numbers. 2012. PadGadge t. Available online:
     http://www.padgadget.com/2012/05/14/us-physicians-adopt-ipad-in-record-numbers/ (accessed on
     25 July 2012).

42. Etherington, D. HealthTap Debuts Paid Private Medical Consultations Via Mobile Device. 2012.
     Available online: http://betakit.com/2012/06/           28/healthtap-debuts-paid-private-medical-

     consultations-via-mobile-device (accessed on 25 July 2012).
43. Practice Central. Reimbursement for Tele           health Services. 2011. Available online:
     http://www.apapracticecentral.org/update/2011/03-31/reimbursement.aspx (accessed on

     25 July 2012).
44. Harper, J. Pros and Cons of Telemedicine fo     r Today’s Workers. 2012. U.S. News. Available

     online: http://health.usnews.com/health-news/artic les/2012/07/24/pros-and-cons-of-telemedicine-
     for-todays-workers/ (accessed on 25 July 2012).

45.  Dolan, P.L. Nearly all U.S. Doctors are now    on social media. 2011. amednews.com. Available
     online: http://www.ama-assn.org/amednews/20110   /9/26/bil20926.htm/ (accessed on 25 July 2012).
46. Tanner, L. Doctors increasingly becoming savvy with technology, social media. 2012. Huffington

     Post. Available online: http://www.huffingt    onpost.com/2012/06/11/doctors-technology-social-
     media-twitter-facebook-health_n_1586624.html/ (accessed on 25 July 2012).

47. More than 1.5 million users are proving aetna’s personal health record is a building block to better
     health.  Aetna    2011. Available online: http://www.aet        na.com/news/newsReleases/2011/
     0906-PHR.html (accessed on 25 July 2012).

48. Swan, M. Emerging patient-driven health care models: An examination of health social networks,
     consumer personalized medicine and quantified self-tracking. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health

     2009, 2, 492–525.
J. Pers. Med. 2012, 2       117


49. Raven, K. 23andMe’s Face in the Crowdsourced Health Research Industry Gets Bigger. Nature
     2012. http://blogs.nature.com/spoonful/2012/07/23andmes-face-in-the-crowdsourced-health-
     research-industry-gets-bigger.html (accessed on 25 July 2012).

50. Swan, M. Multigenic condition risk assessment in direct-to-consumer genomic services. Genet.
     Med. 2010, 12, 279–288.

51. Marcus, A.D. Citizen scientists: Ordinary people are taking control of their health data, making
     their DNA public and running their own experiments. Their big question: Why should science be
     limited to professionals?             Wall Street J.             2011. Available online:

     online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052970204621904577014330551132036.html (accessed on
     25 July 2012).

52. U.S. Food and Drug Administratio n. Table of Pharmacogenomic Biomarkers in Drug Labels.
     2012. Available online: http://www.fda.gov/               Drugs/ScienceResearch/ResearchAreas/

     Pharmacogenetics/ucm083378.htm/ (accessed on 25 July 2012).
53. Lohr, S. The Age of Big Data. New York Times 2012. Available online: http://www.nytimes.com/
     2012/02/12/sunday-review/big-datas-impact-in-the-world.html?pagewanted=all (accessed on

     25 July 2012).
54. Lehmann, J.; Lalmas, M.; Yom-Tov, E.; Dupret, G. Models of user enga gement. In Proceedings

     of the 20th International C   onference on User Modeling, Adaptation and Personalization
     (UMAP 2012), Montreal, Canada, 16–20 July 2012.
55. ScienceDaily. Google flu trends estimates         off, study finds. 2010. Available online:

     http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2010/05/100517101714.htm (accessed on 25 July 2012).
56. Chunara, R.; Andrews, J.R.; Brownstein, J.S.       Social and news media enable estimation of

     epidemiological patterns early in the 2010 Haitian cholera outbreak. Am. J. Trop. Med. Hyg. 2012,
     86, 39–45.
57. Boulos, M.N.; Resch, B.; Crowley, D.N.; Bresli      n, J.G.; Sohn, G.; Burtner, R.; Pike, W.A.;

     Jezierski, E.; Chuang, K.Y. Cr owdsourcing, citizen sensing and     sensor web technologies for
     public and environmental health surveillance and crisis management: Trends, OGC standards and

     application examples. Int. J. Health Geogr. 2011, 10, doi:10.1186/1476-072x-10-67.
58. Keeso, A. Technlogy helping people to track a nd manage illness and disease. 2012. Available

     online: http://betakit.com/2012/   06/23/technology-helping-people-to-track-and-manage-illness-
     and-disease and http://www.nowtrendingchallenge.com (accessed on 25 July 2012).
59. Stomp, W. Foldit success story: Monkey virus retr oviral protease structure solved within days.

     MedGadget 2011. Available online: http://medga dget.com/2011/09/foldit-success-story-monkey-
     virus-retroviral-protease-structure-solved-within-days.html (accessed on 25 July 2012).

60. Stomp, W. Another Success for Foldit: Gamers       Increase Enzyme Activity by a Factor of 18.
     MedGadget 2012. Available online: http://me      dgadget.com/2012/01/another-success-for-foldit-
     gamers-increase-enzyme-activity-by-a-factor-of-18.html (accessed on 25 July 2012).

61. Freifeld, C.C.; Chunara, R.; Me    karu, S.R.; Chan, E.H.; Kass-H     out, T.; Ayala Iacucci, A.;
     Brownstein, J.S. Participatory epidemiology: Us e of mobile phones for community-based health

     reporting. PLoS Med. 2010, 7, e1000376.
62. Biggers, G. Engagement from the Trenches             & Benches, Individuals and participation
     in research: Sharing, controlling, collaborating. In Testimony for the Presidential Commission for
J. Pers. Med. 2012, 2       118


     the Study of Bioethical Issues       Available online: http://www.tvworldwide.com/events/
     bioethics/120517/globe_show/default_go_archive.cfm?gsid=2049&type=flv&test=0&live=0 and
     http://blog.bioethics.gov/2012/05/17/quotes-a-discssion-on-whole-genome-sequencing/ (accessed

     on 25 July 2012).
63. Swan, M.; Hathaway, K.; Hogg, C.; McCauley, R.;        Vollrath, A. Citizen science genomics as a

     model for crowdsourced preventive medicine research.         J. Participat. Med.   2010, 2, e20.
     Supplementary Material Item 6. Personal statem ents from study participants. Available online:
     http://www.jopm.org/citizen-science-genomics-as-a-model-for-crowd-sourced-preventive-

     medicine-research-supplementary-material/ (accessed on 25 July 2012).
64. Taleb, N.N. The Black Swan: The Impact of the Highly Improbable, 1st ed.; Random House: New

     York, NY, USA, 2007; pp. 1–25.
65.  Dolan, B. Safeway: Healthier employees pay less.      MobiHealthNews 2009. Available online:

     http://mobihealthnews.com/4808/insurance-discounts-for-healthy-safeway-employees/ (accessed
     on 25 July 2012).
66. Susman, T. New York Mayor Bloomberg ta         kes aim at giant-sized sugary sodas.   Los Angeles

     Times,    2012. Available online: http       ://articles.latimes.com/2012/may/31/nation/la-na-nn-
     bloomberg-sugary-drinks-20120531 (accessed on 25 July 2012).

67. Associated Press. Anti-obesity pill Belvig gets FDA OK. Cleveland.com 2012. Available online:
     http://www.cleveland.com/healthf it/index.ssf/2012/06/anti-obesity_pill_belvig_gets.html (accessed
     on 25 July 2012).


© 2012 by the authors; licensee MDPI, Basel, Switz      erland. This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and conditions of         the Creative Commons         Attribution license

(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/).