                                            RESEARCH ARTICLE


                                            Increasing Patient Engagement in


                                            Rehabilitation Exercises Using


                                            Computer-Based Citizen Science

                                                          1,2                     3            4                   1,2
                                            Jeffrey Laut     , Francesco Cappa , Oded Nov , Maurizio Porfiri         *

                                            1 Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, New York University Polytechnic School of
                                            Engineering, Six MetroTech Center, Brooklyn, NY, United States of America, 2 Department of Mechanical
                                            and Aerospace Engineering, Sapienza University of Rome, Via Eudossiana 18, Rome 00185, Italy

                                            3 Department of Business and Management, LUISS Guido Carli University, Viale Pola 12, Rome 00198, Italy
                                            4 Department of Technology Management and Innovation, New York University Polytechnic School of
                                            Engineering, Five MetroTech Center, Brooklyn, NY, United States of America

     a11111                                 * mporfiri@nyu.edu




                                            Abstract


                                            Patient motivation is an important factor to consider when developing rehabilitation pro-

   OPEN ACCESS                              grams. Here, we explore the effectiveness of active participation in web-based citizen sci-
                                            ence activities as a means of increasing participant engagement in rehabilitation exercises,
Citation: Laut J, Cappa F, Nov O, Porfiri M (2015)
Increasing Patient Engagement in Rehabilitationough the use of a low-cost haptic joystick interfaced with a laptop computer. Using the
Exercises Using Computer-Based Citizen Science.
                                            joystick, patients navigate a virtual environment representing the site of a citizen science
PLoS ONE 10(3): e0117013. doi:10.1371/journaproject situated in a polluted canal. Participants are tasked with following a path on a laptop
pone.0117013
                                            screen representing the canal. The experiment consists of two conditions: in one condition,
Academic Editor: David Neil Bonter, Cornell
University, UNITED STATES                   a citizen science component where participants classify images from the canal is included;
                                            and in the other, the citizen science component is absent. Both conditions are tested on a
Received: October 3, 2014
                                            group of young patients undergoing rehabilitation treatments and a group of healthy sub-
Accepted: December 16, 2014
                                            jects. A survey administered at the end of both tasks reveals that participants prefer per-
Published: March 20, 2015                   forming the scientific task, and are more likely to choose to repeat it, even at the cost of

Copyright: © 2015 Laut et al. This is an open accessng the time of their rehabilitation exercise. Furthermore, performance indices based

article distributed under the terms of the Creative collected from the joystick indicate significant differences in the trajectories created
Commons Attribution License, which permits  by patients and healthy subjects, suggesting that the low-cost device can be used in a reha-
unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any
                                            bilitation setting for gauging patient recovery.
medium, provided the original author and source are
credited.

Data Availability Statement: All relevant data are
within the paper and its Supporting Information files.

Funding: This research was supported by the

National Science Foundation under Grant # BCIntroduction
1124795 and through a scholarship to J. Laut from
COOPERLINK. The funders had no role in studyRehabilitation is the structured process undertaken toward adapting to unforeseen changes re-

design, data collection and analysis, decisisulting from trauma or disease [1]. For individuals with severe motor dysfunction, it is a neces-
publish, or preparation of the manuscript.  sary step to recover self-reliance [2]. In this context, repetitive exercises have been shown to

Competing Interests: The authors have declaredfer effective rehabilitation treatments in stroke patients [3–7], but often at the cost of a large
that no competing interests exist.          time-commitment from both the physical therapist and patient.





PLOS ONE | DOI:10.1371/journal.pone.0117013     March 20, 2015                                                                               1/17
                                                                                                                  Citizen Science and Rehabilitation



                                               Robotic devices have beenidentified as an effective means to administer [8–10]orcomple-
                                            ment these therapeutic treatments [11], and neuroprosthetics [12, 13] may directly enhance
                                            motor function. By shifting to robotics-based treatments, physical therapists may be able to si-

                                            multaneously treat a greater number of patients and obtain performance measures from the data
                                            gathered through the robotic device’ssensors[    14], which has been demonstrated to be usefulin
                                            assessing motor performance[15, 16]. Within these treatments, measurement of a patient’s

                                            movement is typically of interest, as it allows for gauging recovery through the comparison of
                                            these pathological movements with normal movements [17]. For instance, sensors on robotic de-
                                            vices can collect the duration of completing a task, the smoothness of patients’ movements, and

                                            the jerkiness of the resulting trajectories, all of which have been shown to be valid indicators of
                                            recovery [18, 19] that are often useful to physical therapists for assessing patients’ progress [20].
                                               Although robotic devices have been successfully implemented in therapeutic settings, the

                                            patient must ultimately be willing to conform to the prescribed medical advice for the treat-
                                            ment to be effective [21]. Indeed, a central issue in the effectiveness of rehabilitation is patient
                                            adherence to prescribed regimens, which is often associated with both improved outcomes of

                                            the treatment [22] in addition to increased patient’s satisfaction [23]. In a physical therapy set-
                                            ting, patients tend to be more compliant in performing exercises when they are with a physical
                                            therapist than when they are alone [24]. Lack of motivation has been identified as one of the

                                            factors causing this noncompliance in physical therapy [25–27] and physical activity [28]. Lack
                                            of motivation has also been attributed to non-compliance in elderly patients to perform exer-
                                            cises after discharge from the hospital [29]. Combining motivational enhancement treatment

                                            with conventional physical therapy has been shown to bring about increases in compliance
                                            with exercises [30]. Resting on these findings, we posit that including additional motivational
                                            elements can be a feasible means to increase compliance in rehabilitation regimens.

                                               Many avenues have been investigated for enhancing motivation levels in rehabilitation set-
                                            tings. Simply providing patients with a sensor-based rehabilitation system may intrinsically
                                            motivate patients to perform exercises [31]. The use of computer-based activities has further

                                            been identified as a promising means to administer therapeutic exercises for children with sen-
                                            sorimotor disorders [32]. Toward increasing the accessibility of robotics-based devices in
                                            home settings, the use of an off-the-shelf gaming system has been proposed in [33], whereby

                                            the participant interacts with a virtual environment and experiences haptic feedback through
                                            the system’s controller. Beyond reducing the cost of rehabilitation, off-the-shelf gaming sys-
                                            tems have the potential of enhancing patient engagement and motivation levels in performing

                                            exercises [34]. However, as most commercially available video games are designed for enter-
                                            tainment purposes, they may be too fast-paced for the sensorimotor-impaired in a rehabilita-
                                            tion setting [35]. Serious and social games, not aimed primarily at entertainment [36, 37], are

                                            more likely to be effective as they can be specifically tailored for rehabilitation settings [38].
                                               An approach alternative to gaming, based on science learning, has been proposed in [39].
                                            Therein, participants navigate a virtual representation of a zoo using a haptic joystick where

                                            the presentation of relevant scientific content and force feedback schemes are varied in four
                                            different experiments. The system capitalizes on participants’ interest in science, and results
                                            show that higher levels of satisfaction are attained when performing exercises that contained
                                            the presentation of scientific content. Extending the findings of [39], here we seek to assess if

                                            patient motivation to perform rehabilitation exercises is strengthened by shifting from passive
                                            scientific learning to active performance of scientific tasks in a citizen science project.
                                               Thousands of non-scientists are actively volunteering time and effort towards scientific

                                            tasks in the context of citizen science. In these types of projects, members of the public make
                                            contributions to scientific research projects typically by collecting or processing data [40, 41],
                                            but may also take on collaborative roles with the scientists leading the project [42]. The task




PLOS ONE | DOI:10.1371/journal.pone.0117013     March 20, 2015                                                                              2/17
                                                                                                              Citizen Science and Rehabilitation



                                           difficulty in citizen science varies in the amount of effort required from the participants. In
                                           “Galaxy Zoo,” for example, citizen scientists view images of galaxies collected by astronomers,
                                           and classify the type of galaxy in the photo [43].
                                              The idea of enhancing motivation by substituting science learning with scientific tasks

                                           stems from the motivational factors associated with each of these activities. Indeed, while moti-
                                           vation for learning is mainly intrinsic (i.e., users exhibit a personal interest) [44], citizen scien-
                                           tists are also motivated by collective factors (i.e., users are motivated by advancing science)

                                           [45]. The users of Galaxy Zoo, for example, have been found to be motivated by both their indi-
                                           vidual interest in the subject of Astronomy, as well as the excitement that they experience in
                                           contributing to the scientific project [46]. Based on the effectiveness of including science learn-

                                           ing in exercises demonstrated in [39], citizen science is expected to also be a feasible means to
                                           enhance participant motivation in rehabilitation.
                                              Herein, we present the development of a robotics-based system that allows for assessing the

                                           efficacy of scientific tasks for enhancing participant motivation and willingness to repeat thera-
                                           peutic exercises. The hardware components of [39], namely a low-cost haptic joystick and a
                                           laptop computer, are repurposed and elements of an existing citizen science project developed

                                           by our group, “Brooklyn Atlantis” [47], are included for participants to contribute to a research
                                           project. Brooklyn Atlantis (www.BrooklynAtlantis.org) is an environmental monitoring proj-
                                           ect that is focused on the Gowanus Canal in Brooklyn, NY. Data from the canal are captured
                                           by an aquatic mobile robot equipped with water quality sensors and cameras and uploaded to a

                                           website. Citizen scientists can contribute through the website by analyzing the image data and
                                           adding tags, which describe anything that the participant may deem noteworthy in the scene,
                                           for example, an animal or a piece of debris.

                                              Through the use of the robotics-based setup coupled with an interactive environment for
                                           scientific contribution, the hypothesis that citizen science can provide a motivational incentive
                                           for performing rehabilitation exercises is tested. Using an off-the-shelf haptic joystick (Novint

                                           Falcon), participants maneuver a cursor about a two-dimensional virtual representation of the
                                           Gowanus Canal in two distinct tasks—one with a scientific task, and one without. Furthermore,
                                           we investigate the efficacy of the setup to produce data useful for assessing motor performance

                                           in the context of rehabilitation.

                                           Materials and Methods

                                           Experimental setup

                                           The system consists of a laptop computer and the Novint Falcon device (see Fig. 1), making it
                                           both low-cost and easily transportable. The Novint Falcon is a delta robot [48], meaning that
                                           the end-effector (manipulandum) is unable to rotate, but may translate in all three dimensions.

                                           While the Cartesian x, y, and z positions are controlled by moving the manipulandum, four
                                           buttons located where the hand grasps the joystick provide additional input from the user. The
                                           available workspace provided by the Novint Falcon is similar to those offered by devices used

                                           in robot-mediated therapy focused on the elbow and wrist [49, 50]. The laptop computer re-
                                           ceives position data from the haptic device and sends force commands to deliver an interactive
                                           experience to the user. The system in [39] utilizes Matlab for the program execution, however,

                                           the software for this system is written in C++ using the open-source library libnifalcon, offering
                                           benefits of lower overall system cost, as well as a significantly faster sampling rate of 1000 Hz.


                                           Experimental conditions
                                           This study is comprised of two experimental conditions, specifically, task T and task NT. In

                                           task T, a set of images captured by the aquatic robot as part of the Brooklyn Atlantis project are



PLOS ONE | DOI:10.1371/journal.pone.0117013   March 20, 2015                                                                            3/17
                                                                                                                  Citizen Science and Rehabilitation

































Fig 1. The experimental setup, consisting of a laptop computer and a Novint Falcon haptic device.

doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0117013.g001

                                            presented to each participant at predetermined locations along the canal along with a pop-up

                                            keyboard. The participants select a region of interest within each image, and classify, or tag,
                                            what they see. In task NT, the participants navigate about the same virtual environment with
                                            no images presented.

                                                Upon program execution, the task to be performed is specified as either task T or task NT.
                                            Task T presents the participant with a virtual representation of the Gowanus Canal, where the
                                            water is highlighted in blue as a path to be followed using joystick input (see Fig. 2). Users are

                                            instructed to sequentially hit a series of six waypoints, shown as red dots. Only a single way-
                                            point is displayed at a time in the predetermined order of left to right, thus demanding that

                                            each participant follows a similar path. The participant’s current position is displayed by a dot
                                            that changes color from green to red as the deviation from the path increases.
                                                While in such “map mode,” the motion of the manipulandum is restricted to a plane, so

                                            that the left-right motion of the joystick corresponds to a change in the x position of the cursor
                                            (along the width of the image), and up-down motion corresponds to change in the y position
                                            of the cursor (along the height of the image). The force-feedback capabilities of the joystick are

                                            utilized to provide another level of interactiveness, whereby a total force consisting of a damp-
                                            ing term and a nominal force based on the participant’s distance from the path is given in map

                                            mode. More specifically, the nominal force administered is diverging [39], meaning that as the
                                            participant’s deviation from the path increases, it becomes more difficult to return the cursor
                                            to the path. Indeed, while both assistive and error-amplifying feedback strategies are encoun-

                                            tered in rehabilitation, regimens that administer error-amplifying strategies may be more
                                            effective [51].

                                                The nominal force for each point on the map is calculated offline and stored as a look-up
                                            table to save computation time during program execution. As some sharp changes in the force




PLOS ONE | DOI:10.1371/journal.pone.0117013     March 20, 2015                                                                               4/17
                                                                                                                  Citizen Science and Rehabilitation
























Fig 2. Path displayed to users in map mode, with overlaid dots displaying waypoints (red) and cursor start position (green). The image presented to
the participants was superimposed on an aerial photo of the Gowanus Canal.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0117013.g002




                                            arise due to sharp corners in the canal, the look-up table is smoothened with a Gaussian filter

                                            to deliver a smooth and continuous feeling to the participant. When the trial begins, the cursor
                                            is centered on the map, and the participant must move the cursor along the map to the first

                                            waypoint, located on the left-most part of the path.
                                                When a waypoint is reached in task T, one of the images captured by the Brooklyn Atlantis
                                            robot in the Gowanus Canal is presented with a virtual keyboard in the so-called “tagging

                                            mode,” see Fig. 3. The manipulandum of the Novint Falcon in this mode controls the location
                                            and size of a box that the participant must position in order to tag an item of interest within

                                            the image. Moving the manipulandum left, right, up, and down controls the Cartesian x and y
                                            location of the box within the image, while pushing the manipulandum in or pulling it out con-
                                            trols the size of the box. Clicking the center button sets the position and size of the box in the

                                            image, and allows the user to type what the box contains on the virtual keyboard. A red cursor
                                            indicates the position of the manipulandum, and a letter is selected by hovering over it and
                                            clicking the center button. Once the “enter” key is selected, the image tag is recorded and the

                                            user is returned to the route map. To avoid any discontinuities due to the location of the cursor
                                            upon exiting tagging mode, the cursor and joystick are automatically repositioned to the cur-

                                            rent waypoint on the map. Thus, the so-called “waiting mode” is entered, where a wait screen
                                            is displayed and the joystick is locked in place for 2 seconds.
                                                For task NT, a trial begins also in map mode and users navigate from the center of the map

                                            to each waypoint in sequence. However, unlike task T, reaching the waypoint in task NT sim-
                                            ply prohibits the joystick motion for 2 seconds during waiting mode without presenting an
                                            image to be tagged.

                                                In both tasks, before continuing to the next waypoint, the participant must “escape” from
                                            the current waypoint by exerting a force on the manipulandum greater than a predefined

                                            threshold. This is a low valued threshold that simply serves to allow for identifying a deliberate
                                            re-entry into route traversal, thereby allowing a direct and sound comparison with the path fol-
                                            lowing performance in both task T and NT. After reaching all six waypoints, and, in the case of

                                            task T, tagging all images, the task is complete.




PLOS ONE | DOI:10.1371/journal.pone.0117013     March 20, 2015                                                                               5/17
                                                                                                                Citizen Science and Rehabilitation
































































Fig 3. Example of image displayed during tagging mode with on-screen keyboard.

doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0117013.g003



                                            Post-experiment survey

                                            Following each participant’s completion of both tasks, a nine-question survey is administered.

                                            The survey is designed to assess the participant’s preference between the tasks and their per-
                                            ceived difficulty. The first two questions gather basic information about the participant, where

                                            question 1 (Q1) asks about the subject’s age and gender, and Q2 asks about the arm used for





PLOS ONE | DOI:10.1371/journal.pone.0117013    March 20, 2015                                                                              6/17
                                                                                                             Citizen Science and Rehabilitation



                                           the exercise. Questions 3–5 ask, respectively, “which task did you like more?,”“ which task was
                                           more difficult?,” and “if you had to repeat one of the tasks, which would you choose?,” users
                                           can respond with either an answer of task T or task NT. Q6 and Q7 are answered by choosing a
                                           smiling face, neutral face, or sad face, for the prompts “circle the letter under the face that de-

                                           scribes how identifying objects and animals made you feel” and “circle the letter under the face
                                           that describes how moving the cursor without identifying animals and objects made you feel.”
                                           The response choices to Q8 and Q9 are green, yellow, and red rectangle with “easy,”“medium,”

                                           and “difficult” respectively written under each rectangle, and the questions ask the user to rank
                                           how easy or difficult identifying objects and animals is and to rank how easy only moving the
                                           cursor without identifying objects and animals is.


                                           Ethics statement

                                           The ethics and medical board of the Children’s Hospital “Bambino Gesù,” (Rome, Italy) ap-
                                           proves the experimental protocol and consent procedure. Each participant and one or both of

                                           their parents are explained the details of the experiment, and oral informed consent is obtained
                                           prior to the experiment execution, while written consent from parents is obtained by hospital
                                           staff and securely stored at the Children’s Hospital “Bambino Gesù.”


                                           Participants

                                           To demonstrate the capability of the proposed setup to deliver meaningful performance indices
                                           for rehabilitation purposes, the experiment is carried out on two groups of individuals, that is,
                                           a group of 30 patients (age 12.1 ± 4.2 years) enrolled in physical rehabilitation regimens pri-

                                           marily for the upper limb, and a group of 30 healthy individuals (age 10.3 ± 2.8 years).
                                              The inclusion criteria for all participants is a lack of prior experience with the Novint Falcon
                                           haptic device or the Brooklyn Atlantis project. In addition, patients are selected by a physical

                                           therapist based on their age and the severity of their physical impairments, which are primarily
                                           a result of stroke or cerebral palsy. The experimental setup requires a high degree of fine motor
                                           skills, as participants must maneuver about a path within a small workspace and be able to se-

                                           lect individual letters for tagging purposes. Therefore, patients use whichever arm is more ca-
                                           pable of completing the exercises. All of the trials for both patients and healthy subjects are
                                           performed at the Children’s Hospital “Bambino Gesù,” in Rome, Italy.


                                           Experimental protocol

                                           Participants from both the group of healthy subjects and the group of patients are subject to
                                           the same protocol. The experimental platform is placed on a desk, and the participant is asked

                                           to sit comfortably on a chair in front of the desk. Depending on the hand being used, the
                                           Novint Falcon is placed either on the right or on the left of the laptop computer. Prior to begin-
                                           ning the experiment, the participant is given an overview of the Brooklyn Atlantis citizen sci-
                                           ence project through a video. The order of execution of tasks T and NT are alternated such that

                                           an equal number of participants perform task T first as those who perform task NT first within
                                           each group.


                                           Data treatment

                                           As each task is being executed, all data pertinent to the user’s input and state of the program,
                                           such as cursor position, force feedback commanded, elapsed time, and operating mode of the
                                           program are logged to a datafile. This comprehensive collection of data allows for the assess-

                                           ment of each participant’s performance.



PLOS ONE | DOI:10.1371/journal.pone.0117013   March 20, 2015                                                                           7/17
                                                                                                               Citizen Science and Rehabilitation



                                              All of the post-processing of the logged data is performed in Matlab, where a script imports
                                           the datafile and extracts the relevant data. To filter the position data, a sixth-order butterworth
                                           filter with an 11 Hz cutoff frequency is implemented following [52]. The data are partitioned

                                           based on the program operating mode (e.g., map mode, waiting mode, or tagging mode), and
                                           for both tasks, only the data corresponding to map mode is investigated. Furthermore, since
                                           the escape motion of leaving a waypoint often induces a large acceleration, a half-second of

                                           data following the escape from each waypoint is also excluded. Partitioning the data in this
                                           manner that only includes path following allows for accurate performance comparisons both

                                           between groups and between tasks.


                                           Performance indices
                                           Through the use of the high-resolution sensor data provided in robot mediated therapy, a set

                                           of performance indices based on the trajectory created by a participant may be used to quickly
                                           quantify their performance. The following metrics, which have been previously used and vali-
                                           dated in upper-limb robot-mediated therapy [18, 52, 53], are scored: (i) the normalized path

                                           length, which is the length of the path taken by the user divided by the length of the path to be
                                           followed [53]; (ii) the mean of the jerk, found by averaging the jerk exhibited at velocities above
                                           a minimum velocity threshold v         [52]; (iii) the speed metric, measured as the mean velocity
                                                                            thresh
                                           above v threshivided by the peak velocity [18]; and (iv) the mean arrest period ratio, which is
                                           the proportion of time spent moving at a velocity above v   thresh18]. In addition to these met-
                                           rics, the total time spent moving on the path, or path duration, and the total time spent on the

                                           task, or task duration, are scored.


                                           Statistical analysis
                                           For all questions, a Mann-Whitney U-test is used to assess differences between the responses

                                           of the two groups, consisting of 30 patients and 30 healthy subjects [54]. To study within group
                                           preference, the neutral response is omitted from the analysis of questions Q6–Q9, and for all

                                           questions we test the hypothesis that positive and negative responses are equally likely using a
                                           chi-square test [55].
                                              For survey questions Q3–Q5, a “positive” response is one that coincides with expectations,

                                           while a negative response does not. Specifically, for Q3, which asks which task is preferred, the
                                           choice of task T is considered positive. For Q4, which asks to identify the more difficult task,
                                           task T is also considered positive, and for Q5, which asks to identify which task the participant

                                           would like to repeat, task T is again taken as positive. For Q6 and Q7, the answer choices are a
                                           smiling face (positive response), neutral face (neutral response), or sad face (negative re-
                                           sponse), and for Q8 and Q9, the answer choices are “easy” (positive), “medium” (neutral), and

                                           “hard” (negative).
                                              Considering the performance metrics, differences between the two groups are assessed
                                           using the non-parametric variant of ANOVA, the Kruskal-Wallis test [54], while within groups

                                           and between tasks, the Wilcoxon signed rank test is used [54].
                                              All statistical analyses are performed in Matlab with the significance level set at p < 0.05.


                                           Results

                                           Delivery of scientific tasks influences individual
                                           preference (Fig. 4)Q3 –Q5

                                           The results support the hypothesis that individuals prefer the scientific task. When asked to in-
                                           dicate their preferred task (Q3), the responses between the groups are not significantly different




PLOS ONE | DOI:10.1371/journal.pone.0117013    March 20, 2015                                                                            8/17
                                                                                                             Citizen Science and Rehabilitation


























Fig 4. Bar plot of survey results for questions Q3–Q9 (see Table 1). Gray bars indicate the proportion of positive responses from patients, while
black bars refer to healthy subjects (for Q6–Q9, neutral responses are omitted). An asterisk above the bar indicates a significant difference from chance. For
Q6–Q9, the fraction of neutral responses is: 0.17, 0.57, 0.43, and 0.50 for healthy subjects, respectively, and 0.33, 0.63, 0.37, and 0.27 for patients.

doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0117013.g004





                                           Table 1. List of survey questions administered to all participants after the completion of both tasks.

                                           Q3   which task did you like more?
                                           Q4   which task was more difﬁcult?

                                           Q5   if you had to repeat one of the tasks, which would you choose?
                                           Q6   circle the letter under the face that describes how identifying objects and animals made you feel.

                                           Q7   circle the letter under the face that describes how moving the cursor without identifying animals and
                                                objects made you feel.
                                           Q8   rank how easy or difﬁcult identifying objects and animals is.

                                           Q9   rank how easy only moving the cursor without identifying objects and animals is.

                                           doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0117013.t001



                                           (p = 0.5517), and both healthy subjects and patients indicate a robust preference for the scien-

                                           tific task (p = 0.0010 for patients and p = 0.0106 for healthy subjects). Further, the survey re-
                                           sponses suggest that neither healthy subjects (p = 0.4652) nor patients (p = 0.0679) perceive

                                           one task to be more difficult than the other (Q4), and their responses fail to reach a significant
                                           difference (p = 0.0730). Consistent with task preference, results also support the expectation

                                           that, given a choice to repeat one of the tasks, both groups choose the scientific task (Q5). In

                                           fact, both healthy subjects (p = 0.0106) and patients (p = 0.0010) indicate that they would prefer
                                           to repeat task T over task NT, and such responses are not significantly different (p = 0.5517).



                                           Dissecting the elements contributing to individual

                                           preference (Fig. 4)Q6 –Q9

                                           Both patients (p < 0.0001) and healthy subjects (p < 0.0001) associate a positive feeling with
                                           tagging images (Q6). Both groups (p < 0.0001) consider moving the cursor to be positive (Q7),

                                           and the responses between the groups do not significantly differ (p = 0.6073). The responses of
                                           healthy subjects and patients regarding the difficulty of image classification (Q8) are indistin-

                                           guishable (p = 0.9061), with both healthy subjects’ and patients’ (p < 0.0001) concurring on





PLOS ONE | DOI:10.1371/journal.pone.0117013   March 20, 2015                                                                           9/17
                                                                                                                    Citizen Science and Rehabilitation



                                             the assessment that such a task is not difficult. The two group’s responses are not statistically

                                             different when ranking the difficulty of moving the cursor (Q9) (p = 0.3570), with the re-
                                             sponses of healthy subjects (p < 0.0001) and patients (p = 0.0019) indicating it to be
                                             not difficult.



                                             Individual performance in path following (Fig. 5)
                                             Consistent for each task, the healthy group of participants score significantly better for normal-

                                             ized path length and mean arrest period ratio, in addition to path duration (p = 0.0076, p =
                                             0.0033, and p = 0.0076 for normalized path length, mean arrest period ratio, and path duration

                                             in task T, respectively, and p = 0.0054, p = 0.0062, and p = 0.0444 in task NT).
                                                Between the two groups for each task, the mean of jerk is not significantly different (p =
                                             0.4918 and p = 0.4965 for tasks T and NT, respectively). However the other indicator of move-

                                             ment smoothness, the speed metric, is significantly better in the healthy population for task NT
                                             (p = 0.0166), but not significantly different between the two groups for task T (p = 0.1580).

                                                Some significant differences in performance metrics are found within groups and between
                                             tasks. Considering patients, the normalized path length for task T of 2.91 is significantly greater
                                             than that of 2.39 for task NT (p = 0.0014). Task NT for patients also has a significantly lower

                                             mean of jerk (p = 0.0098). Similarly, healthy subjects generate trajectories with significantly
                                             smaller normalized path length and mean of jerk for task NT (p = 0.0117 and p = 0.0002, re-

                                             spectively), indicating that both groups performed better on task NT. Additionally, healthy
                                             subjects have a significantly higher mean arrest period ratio for task NT (p = 0.0407).

                                                Counting the time from the beginning to the end of each task (the task duration), Task T
                                             requires significantly more time (about four times as much) than task NT for both patients
                                             (p < 0.0001) and healthy subjects (p < 0.0001).





























Fig 5. Speed metric (SM), normalized path length (NPL), mean of jerk (MJ), mean arrest period ratio (MAPR), path duration (PD), and task duration
(TD) for both groups and both tasks, where P_T, P_NT, H_T, and H_NT denote respectively patients task T, patients task NT, healthy subjects task
T, and healthy subjects task NT. Results are given as box plots, where the red line is the median, edges are the 25th and 75th percentiles, and whiskers
extend to the extremes of the data. Whiskers not sharing a common letter are statistically different.

doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0117013.g005




PLOS ONE | DOI:10.1371/journal.pone.0117013      March 20, 2015                                                                               10 / 17
                                                                                                             Citizen Science and Rehabilitation



                                           Discussion
                                           In this study, we show that including a web-based citizen-science participation module in a ro-

                                           botics-based low-cost rehabilitation platform is a viable means to engage individuals in thera-
                                           peutic exercises. The platform consists of an off-the-shelf haptic joystick and laptop computer.
                                           Individuals use the joystick to participate in a citizen science project wherein the performance

                                           of scientific tasks is varied in two scenarios. The setup allows for administering repetitive exer-
                                           cises often characteristic of rehabilitation treatments [3], while also capturing sensor data suffi-
                                           cient for constructing a set of performance metrics that can be used for rehabilitation

                                           assessment [18, 52, 53].


                                           Including citizen science tasks increases participants’ engagement in
                                           rehabilitation tasks

                                           An important finding of this study lies in the use of citizen-science in rehabilitation exercises.
                                           Specifically, our results show that including scientific tasks increases preference for rehabilita-

                                           tion. A key issue in rehabilitation regimens is the willingness of patients to perform the pre-
                                           scribed exercises [22], where motivation has been identified as a significant factor in following
                                           the prescribed regimen [25–27]. As such, emphasis has been placed on providing avenues for
                                           motivating patients. The use of video games is widely explored in this context, however motiva-

                                           tion for gaming is shown to vary with both age [56] and gender [57]. Building on the work pre-
                                           sented in [39], we have here presented an interactive rehabilitation system that acts on multiple
                                           motivational drivers. While [39] leverages science learning that targets intrinsic motivation

                                           [44], active science participation through citizen science considered herein addresses a wider
                                           spectrum of motivations. Indeed, by performing science tasks users are motivated both by per-
                                           sonal interest and by contributing to science [45].

                                              Interestingly, in choosing to repeat the citizen science task, participants are electing to per-
                                           form the task that takes significantly more time. This is particularly telling when considering
                                           that increasing the time spent performing exercises may be beneficial to the rehabilitation pro-

                                           cess [58]. In this context, the work reported here shows that not only does the inclusion of citi-
                                           zen science tasks increase preference for exercises and willingness to repeat them, but it also
                                           motivates individuals to perform exercises that require more time than those without. While

                                           this study was based on a virtual environment unfamiliar to the participants, we expect motiva-
                                           tion to further increase by providing virtual environments that are more relevant to the partici-
                                           pants, since involvement in community-based online activities such as mapping has been
                                           found to originate primarily from the geographic region where the project takes place [59].

                                              The result that the difficulty of the exercise as experienced by participants is similar across
                                           both conditions (with and without the citizen science task) and groups is also an important
                                           finding. The act of typing words using the joystick to tag the images requires precise position-

                                           ing of the joystick to select each letter, which is expected to be perceived as a difficult task for
                                           motorically impaired participants, who generally have difficulties in using computer peripher-
                                           als, such as a mouse and keyboard [60]. The excitement of contributing to science may com-

                                           pensate for this perceived difficulty, and thereby allow participants to enjoy performing
                                           additional tasks.


                                           The low-cost setup provides useful data for quantifying sensorimotor

                                           performance
                                           Accurately quantifying an individual’s sensorimotor performance is an important factor in

                                           judging the severity of their impairment and tracking their progress in the recovery of motor



PLOS ONE | DOI:10.1371/journal.pone.0117013   March 20, 2015                                                                          11 / 17
                                                                                                                 Citizen Science and Rehabilitation



                                            function. For the proposed low-cost setup to be a feasible method for performing rehabilitation
                                            exercises in the absence of a physical therapist, the device must be able to collect sufficient data
                                            for detecting the different levels of performance of healthy subjects and patients.
                                               Further interpreting the findings that healthy subjects in general score better on normalized

                                            path length, mean arrest period ratio, and path duration, we evince that not only do healthy
                                            subjects perform path following in a quicker time and with fewer pauses, but they also do it
                                            more accurately than patients. While an apparent increase in performance of the healthy group

                                            when compared to the group of patients may be ascribed to the age difference between the two
                                            groups, motor performance typically increases with age [61]. Given that the mean age of the
                                            patients is greater than that of the healthy subjects, we propose that deficiencies in patients’

                                            performance with respect to the healthy subjects are likely due to their pathology, and not their
                                            age. The better performance on the speed metric for healthy subjects supports the expectation
                                            that healthy subjects have smoother movements than patients [18]. Similarly, a high mean of

                                            jerk in patients was expected due to less smooth movements [18], but the mean of jerk was
                                            found to not be significantly different between two groups. This may be explained by the signif-
                                            icantly lower path duration. Given that the healthy subjects cover the same path in a shorter

                                            amount of time, it may be reasonable to expect higher levels of jerk. In other words, if the par-
                                            ticipants were told to take a specific amount of time to travel the path, a difference in the mean
                                            of the jerk of the trajectories between patients and healthy subjects may arise.
                                               Both patients and healthy subjects score better on normalized path length and mean of jerk

                                            in task NT. The decrease in path-following performance associated with task T for both groups
                                            may be due to the shift in attention required in task T from following a path to tagging an
                                            image, and back to following a path, while in task NT the participant is focused only on follow-

                                            ing the path for the duration of the trial. Furthermore, task T has a longer break between path
                                            following segments due to the time required for tagging. Such a break may negatively impact
                                            the participants’ retention of their learned path following ability, thereby degrading perfor-

                                            mance [62]. Additionally, while in task NT the primary (and sole) objective is to follow the
                                            path, and the additional objective in task T of tagging images may take precedence and be
                                            more engaging in the eyes of the participant. In other words, in task T, the participant may sac-

                                            rifice the accuracy of path following to reach the additional goal of tagging an image, where ac-
                                            curacy of movements has been shown to be affected by focus [63]. The finding that both
                                            groups score better on speed metric in task NT is consistent with the results reported in [39],

                                            where healthy subjects exhibited a significantly better speed metric in a path following task in
                                            the absence of science learning.


                                            Citizen science projects and rehabilitation may benefit from each other

                                            The present study demonstrates that an interactive system, which provides a context for images
                                            to be tagged within a game-like environment, is enjoyable for both healthy subjects and pa-

                                            tients, who take part in an authentic research project. Participants indeed contribute to Brook-
                                            lyn Atlantis by gathering useful data in the form of image tags. In this specific empirical study,
                                            the participants’ contribution to citizen science is limited to the identification of canoes, birds,

                                            and trees in a predefined set of six images. In future studies, we will enable web-based capabili-
                                            ties of the platform, to engage each participant in the analysis of a wider variety of images,
                                            thereby increasing the overall citizen science contribution.

                                               While rehabilitation has pursued videogame integration with the aim of increasing compli-
                                            ance [64–66], citizen science has seldom also leveraged game-like components to increase par-
                                            ticipation [67]. In Foldit, for example, citizen scientists compete and collaborate in a game-like

                                            environment for identifying protein structures [68], and the ESP game utilizes a gaming



PLOS ONE | DOI:10.1371/journal.pone.0117013    March 20, 2015                                                                             12 / 17
                                                                                                              Citizen Science and Rehabilitation



                                           environment to motivate a pair of users to label images online [69]. Targeting additional moti-
                                           vation drivers related to gaming, such as exploring a map through a haptic device as we pro-
                                           pose here, may prove successful in enhancing participation in citizen science projects, which
                                           are often limited to a relatively small number of active volunteers [70].

                                              Without background information on the project, the act of tagging a series of images may
                                           be perceived as extraneous work. Thus, providing participants with context for their task, such
                                           as navigating a virtual environment, offers an added degree of meaning for their contribution,

                                           which may be important for fostering commitment [71]. Future work will further elucidate this
                                           hypothesis by considering additional experimental conditions, in which image tagging is not
                                           associated with a citizen science project.


                                           Conclusions

                                           In conclusion, this study indicates that citizen science is an effective means to engage patients
                                           in rehabilitation exercises. The system utilized in this study, consisting of a low-cost haptic joy-

                                           stick and laptop computer, is also able to sufficiently quantify performance, enabling its use in
                                           a rehabilitation setting. The results show that groups of healthy subjects and patients undergo-
                                           ing rehabilitation treatments prefer performing an exercise with a citizen science component,

                                           and would choose to repeat it. The data gathered from the low-cost haptic device permits an in-
                                           dividual’s trajectory to be quantified in terms of a set of performance metrics. Comparing the
                                           performance metrics of patients with those of healthy subjects, significant differences in the

                                           trajectories are observed, where healthy subjects generally score better. These findings suggest
                                           that this low-cost system can effectively provide useful data for evaluating a patient’s level of re-
                                           covery, where the performance metrics of patients are expected to approach those of healthy

                                           subjects as they recover.
                                              This study involved only children as participants. We expect some of the findings to vary
                                           with increasing age, as age-related differences have been demonstrated in videogame play, for
                                           example, where adolescents were found to play videogames less often as age increases, but for

                                           longer time periods [72]. In future studies, the role of age on engagement in the proposed exer-
                                           cises, as well as means for tailoring the system to various age groups, will be investigated.
                                              Ultimately, we anticipate this system to find application as a low-cost platform for telereh-

                                           abilitation [73] for at-home treatments following hospital discharge. As patients perform their
                                           prescribed exercises while contributing to a science project, the trajectory data from each trial
                                           can be automatically sent to a physical therapist, who may also remotely set the level of

                                           intensity of the force feedback.


                                           Supporting Information
                                           S1 Dataset. Raw trajectory data collected by the haptic device, set 1.

                                           (ZIP)

                                           S2 Dataset. Raw trajectory data collected by the haptic device, set 2.
                                           (ZIP)

                                           S3 Dataset. Raw trajectory data collected by the haptic device, set 3.
                                           (ZIP)

                                           S4 Dataset. Raw trajectory data collected by the haptic device, set 4.
                                           (ZIP)

                                           S5 Dataset. Raw trajectory data collected by the haptic device, set 5.

                                           (ZIP)



PLOS ONE | DOI:10.1371/journal.pone.0117013   March 20, 2015                                                                           13 / 17
                                                                                                                    Citizen Science and Rehabilitation




                                             S6 Dataset. Raw trajectory data collected by the haptic device, set 6.

                                             (ZIP)

                                             S1 Table. Participant survey responses.

                                             (XLS)




                                             Acknowledgments

                                             We gratefully thank Dr. M. Petrarca and Dr. A Colazza for assistance with selecting and pro-

                                             viding patients for the study: We also acknowledge Prof. P. Cappa for the accommodation at
                                             Sapienza University of Rome Movement Analysis and Robotics Laboratory, and the guidance

                                             and assistance with the conceptualization and design of the experiment.



                                             Author Contributions

                                             Conceived and designed the experiments: JL ON MP. Performed the experiments: JL FC. Ana-

                                             lyzed the data: JL FC ON MP. Contributed reagents/materials/analysis tools: JL ON MP. Wrote

                                             the paper: JL ON MP. Developed the experimental setup: JL.



                                             References

                                              1.   Gunasekera WSL, Bendall J (2005) Rehabilitation of neurologically injured patients. In: Neurosurgery,
                                                   London: Springer. pp. 407–421.

                                              2.   de NAP Shelton F, Volpe BT, Reding M (2001) Motor impairment as a predictor of functional recovery
                                                   and guide to rehabilitation treatment after stroke. Neurorehabilitation and Neural Repair 15: 229–237.
                                                   doi: 10.1177/154596830101500311 PMID: 11944745

                                              3.   Bütefisch C, Hummelsheim H, Denzler P, Mauritz KH (1995) Repetitive training of isolated movements
                                                   improves the outcome of motor rehabilitation of the centrally paretic hand. Journal of the Neurological
                                                   Sciences 130: 59–68. doi: 10.1016/0022-510X(95)00003-K PMID: 7650532

                                              4.   Harris JE, Eng JJ, Miller WC, Dawson AS (2009) A self-administered graded repetitive arm supplemen-
                                                   tary program (grasp) improves arm function during inpatient stroke rehabilitation a multi-site random-
                                                   ized controlled trial. Stroke 40: 2123–2128. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.108.544585 PMID: 19359633

                                              5.   Whitall J, Waller SM, Silver KH, Macko RF (2000) Repetitive bilateral arm training with rhythmic audito-
                                                   ry cueing improves motor function in chronic hemiparetic stroke. Stroke 31: 2390–2395. doi: 10.1161/
                                                   01.STR.31.10.2390 PMID: 11022069

                                              6.   Liepert J, Bauder H, Miltner WH, Taub E, Weiller C (2000) Treatment-induced cortical reorganization
                                                   after stroke in humans. Stroke 31: 1210–1216. doi: 10.1161/01.STR.31.6.1210 PMID: 10835434

                                              7.   Luft AR, McCombe-Waller S, Whitall J, Forrester LW, Macko R, et al. (2004) Repetitive bilateral arm
                                                   training and motor cortex activation in chronic stroke: a randomized controlled trial. Journal of the Amer-
                                                   ican Medical Association 292: 1853–1861. doi: 10.1001/jama.292.15.1853 PMID: 15494583

                                              8.   Lum PS, Burgar CG, Shor PC, Majmundar M, Van der Loos M (2002) Robot-assisted movement train-
                                                   ing compared with conventional therapy techniques for the rehabilitation of upper-limb motor function

                                                   after stroke. Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation 83: 952–959. doi: 10.1053/apmr.2001.
                                                   33101 PMID: 12098155

                                              9.   Fasoli SE, Krebs HI, Stein J, Frontera WR, Hogan N (2003) Effects of robotic therapy on motor im-
                                                   pairment and recovery in chronic stroke. Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation 84: 477–
                                                   482. doi: 10.1053/apmr.2003.50110 PMID: 12690583

                                             10.   Mazzoleni S, Puzzolante L, Zollo L, Dario P, Posteraro F (2014) Mechanisms of motor recovery in
                                                   chronic and subacute stroke patients following a robot-aided training. IEEE Transactions on Haptics 7:
                                                   175–180. doi: 10.1109/TOH.2013.73 PMID: 24968381

                                             11.   Masiero S, Celia A, Rosati G, Armani M (2007) Robotic-assisted rehabilitation of the upper limb after
                                                   acute stroke. Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation 88: 142–149. doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2006.
                                                   10.032 PMID: 17270510

                                             12.   Jaramillo P, Shoemaker A, Leonessa A, Grange RW (2012) Skeletal muscle contraction in feedback
                                                   control. In: Dynamic Systems and Control Conference. American Society of Mechanical
                                                   Engineers, pp. 483–492. doi: 10.1115/DSCC2012-MOVIC2012-8592





PLOS ONE | DOI:10.1371/journal.pone.0117013      March 20, 2015                                                                               14 / 17
                                                                                                                        Citizen Science and Rehabilitation




                                               13.   Ravichandran R, Sundarrajan S, Venugopal JR, Mukherjee S, Ramakrishna S (2010) Applications of
                                                     conducting polymers and their issues in biomedical engineering. Journal of the Royal Society Interface:

                                                     rsif20100120 doi: 10.1098/rsif.2010.0120.focus PMID: 20610422
                                               14.   Riener R, Nef T, Colombo G (2005) Robot-aided neurorehabilitation of the upper extremities. Medical

                                                     and Biological Engineering and Computing 43: 2–10. doi: 10.1007/BF02345116 PMID: 15742713

                                               15.   Zollo L, Rossini L, Bravi M, Magrone G, Sterzi S, et al. (2011) Quantitative evaluation of upper-limb
                                                     motor control in robot-aided rehabilitation. Medical & Biological Engineering & Computing 49: 1131–
                                                     1144. doi: 10.1007/s11517-011-0808-1 PMID: 21792622

                                               16.   Lee H, Ho P, Rastgaar M, Krebs HI, Hogan N (2014) Multivariable static ankle mechanical impedance

                                                     with active muscles. IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering 22: 44–52.
                                                     doi: 10.1109/TNSRE.2013.2262689 PMID: 24107970

                                               17.   Wong WY, Wong MS, Lo KH (2007) Clinical applications of sensors for human posture and movement
                                                     analysis: a review. Prosthetics and Orthotics International 31: 62–75. doi: 10.1080/
                                                     03093640600983949 PMID: 17365886

                                               18.   Rohrer B, Fasoli S, Krebs HI, Hughes R, Volpe B, et al. (2002) Movement smoothness changes during

                                                     stroke recovery. The Journal of Neuroscience 22: 8297–8304. PMID: 12223584

                                               19.   Carpinella I, Cattaneo D, Abuarqub S, Ferrarin M (2009) Robot-based rehabilitation of the upper limbs
                                                     in multiple sclerosis: feasibility and preliminary results. Journal of Rehabilitation Medicine 41: 966–970.
                                                     doi: 10.2340/16501977-0401 PMID: 19841825

                                               20.   Hidler J, Nichols D, Pelliccio M, Brady K, et al. (2005) Advances in the understanding and treatment of
                                                     stroke impairment using robotic devices. Topics in Stroke Rehabilitation 12: 22–35. doi: 10.1310/

                                                     RYT5-62N4-CTVX-8JTE PMID: 15940582

                                               21.   Jay S, Litt IF, Durant RH (1984) Compliance with therapeutic regimens. Journal of Adolescent Health
                                                     Care 5: 124–136. doi: 10.1016/S0197-0070(84)80012-1 PMID: 6368505

                                               22.   Duncan PW, Horner RD, Reker DM, Samsa GP, Hoenig H, et al. (2002) Adherence to postacute reha-
                                                     bilitation guidelines is associated with functional recovery in stroke. Stroke 33: 167–178. doi: 10.1161/

                                                     hs0102.101014 PMID: 11779907
                                               23.   Reker DM, Duncan PW, Horner RD, Hoenig H, Samsa GP, et al. (2002) Postacute stroke guideline

                                                     compliance is associated with greater patient satisfaction. Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabili-
                                                     tation 83: 750–756. doi: 10.1053/apmr.2002.99736 PMID: 12048651

                                               24.   Campbell R, Evans M, Tucker M, Quilty B, Dieppe P, et al. (2001) Why don’t patients do their exer-
                                                     cises? understanding non-compliance with physiotherapy in patients with osteoarthritis of the knee.

                                                     Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health 55. doi: 10.1136/jech.55.2.132 PMID: 11154253

                                               25.   Sluijs EM, Kok GJ, van der Zee J (1993) Correlates of exercise compliance in physical therapy. Physi-
                                                     cal Therapy 73: 771–782. PMID: 8234458

                                               26.   Ice R (1985) Long-term compliance. Physical Therapy 65: 1832–1839. PMID: 3906687

                                               27.   Dishman RK, Ickes W (1981) Self-motivation and adherence to therapeutic exercise. Journal of Behav-
                                                     ioral Medicine 4: 421–438. doi: 10.1007/BF00846151 PMID: 7338896

                                               28.   Dishman RK, Ickes W, Morgan WP (1980) Self-motivation and adherence to habitual physical activity.
                                                     Journal of Applied Social Psychology 10: 115–132. doi: 10.1111/j.1559-1816.1980.tb00697.x

                                               29.   Hill AM, Hoffmann T, McPhail S, Beer C, Hill KD, et al. (2011) Factors associated with older patients’
                                                     engagement in exercise after hospital discharge. Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation 92:

                                                     1395–1403. doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2011.04.009 PMID: 21878210

                                               30.   Vong SK, Cheing GL, Chan F, So EM, Chan CC (2011) Motivational enhancement therapy in addition
                                                     to physical therapy improves motivational factors and treatment outcomes in people with low back pain:
                                                     a randomized controlled trial. Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation 92: 176–183. doi: 10.

                                                     1016/j.apmr.2010.10.016 PMID: 21272712

                                               31.   Timmermans AA, Seelen HA, Geers RP, Saini PK, Winter S, et al. (2010) Sensor-based arm skill train-
                                                     ing in chronic stroke patients: results on treatment outcome, patient motivation, and system usability.
                                                     IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering 18: 284–292. doi: 10.1109/

                                                     TNSRE.2010.2047608 PMID: 20388603
                                               32.   Sandlund M, McDonough S, Häger-ross C (2009) Interactive computer play in rehabilitation of children

                                                     with sensorimotor disorders: a systematic review. Developmental Medicine & Child Neurology 51:
                                                     173–179. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-8749.2008.03184.x PMID: 19191834

                                               33.   Deutsch JE, Borbely M, Filler J, Huhn K, Guarrera-Bowlby P (2008) Use of a low-cost, commercially
                                                     available gaming console (Wii) for rehabilitation of an adolescent with cerebral palsy. Physical Therapy

                                                     88: 1196–1207. doi: 10.2522/ptj.20080062 PMID: 18689607









PLOS ONE | DOI:10.1371/journal.pone.0117013        March 20, 2015                                                                                   15 / 17
                                                                                                                        Citizen Science and Rehabilitation




                                               34.   Betker AL, Szturm T, Moussavi ZK, Nett C (2006) Video game—based exercises for balance rehabilita-
                                                     tion: a single-subject design. Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation 87: 1141–1149. doi: 10.

                                                     1016/j.apmr.2006.04.010 PMID: 16876562
                                               35.   Burke JW, McNeill M, Charles D, Morrow PJ, Crosbie J, et al. (2009) Serious games for upper limb re-

                                                     habilitation following stroke. In: Conference in Games and Virtual Worlds for Serious Applications.
                                                     IEEE, pp. 103–110. doi: 10.1109/VS-GAMES.2009.17

                                               36.   Zyda M (2005) From visual simulation to virtual reality to games. Computer 38: 25–32. doi: 10.1109/
                                                     MC.2005.297

                                               37.   De Weyer T, Robert K, Hariandja JRO, Alders G, Coninx K (2012) The social maze: A collaborative

                                                     game to motivate ms patients for upper limb training. In: Entertainment Computing-ICEC 2012.
                                                     ICEC, pp. 476–479. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-33542-6_57

                                               38.   Burke JW, McNeill M, Charles DK, Morrow PJ, Crosbie JH, et al. (2009) Optimising engagement for
                                                     stroke rehabilitation using serious games. The Visual Computer 25: 1085–1099. doi: 10.1007/s00371-
                                                     009-0387-4

                                               39.   Cappa P, Clerico A, Nov O, Porfiri M (2013) Can force feedback and science learning enhance the ef-

                                                     fectiveness of neurorehabilitation? an experimental study on using a low-cost 3D joystick and a virtual
                                                     visit to a zoo. Plos ONE 8: e77589. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0083945 PMID: 24349562

                                               40.   Silvertown J (2009) A new dawn for citizen science. Trends in Ecology & Evolution 24: 467–471. doi:
                                                     10.1016/j.tree.2009.03.017 PMID: 19586682

                                               41.   Nov O, Anderson D, Arazy O (2010) Volunteer computing: a model of the factors determining contribu-
                                                     tion to community-based scientific research. In: Proceedings of the 19th international conference on

                                                     World wide web. ACM, pp. 741–750. doi: 10.1145/1772690.1772766

                                               42.   Haklay M (2013) Citizen science and volunteered geographic information: Overview and typology of
                                                     participation. In: Crowdsourcing Geographic Knowledge, London: Springer. pp. 105–122. doi: 10.
                                                     1007/978-94-007-4587-2_7

                                               43.   Lintott CJ, Schawinski K, Slosar A, Land K, Bamford S, et al. (2008) Galaxy zoo: morphologies derived

                                                     from visual inspection of galaxies from the sloan digital sky survey. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astro-
                                                     nomical Society 389: 1179–1189. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2008.13689.x

                                               44.   Cordova DI, Lepper MR (1996) Intrinsic motivation and the process of learning: Beneficial effects of
                                                     contextualization, personalization, and choice. Journal of Educational Psychology 88: 715. doi: 10.

                                                     1037/0022-0663.88.4.715
                                               45.   Nov O, Arazy O, Anderson D (2014) Scientists@ home: what drives the quantity and quality of online

                                                     citizen science participation? Plos ONE 9: e90375. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0090375 PMID:
                                                     24690612

                                               46.   Raddick MJ, Bracey G, Gay PL, Lintott CJ, Murray P, et al. (2010) Galaxy zoo: Exploring the motiva-
                                                     tions of citizen science volunteers. Astronomy Education Review 9: 010103. doi: 10.3847/

                                                     AER2009036

                                               47.   Laut J, Henry E, Nov O, Porfiri M (2014) Development of a mechatronics-based citizen science platform
                                                     for aquatic environmental monitoring. IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics 19: 1541–1551. doi:
                                                     10.1109/TMECH.2013.2287705

                                               48.   Vischer P, Clavel R (1998) Kinematic calibration of the parallel delta robot. Robotica 16: 207–218. doi:
                                                     10.1017/S0263574798000538

                                               49.   Colombo R, Pisano F, Micera S, Mazzone A, Delconte C, et al. (2005) Robotic techniques for upper

                                                     limb evaluation and rehabilitation of stroke patients. IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Reha-
                                                     bilitation Engineering 13: 311–324. doi: 10.1109/TNSRE.2005.848352 PMID: 16200755

                                               50.   Charles SK, Krebs HI, Volpe BT, Lynch D, Hogan N (2005) Wrist rehabilitation following stroke: initial
                                                     clinical results. In: 9th International Conference on Rehabilitation Robotics. IEEE, pp. 13–16.

                                               51.   Patton JL, Stoykov ME, Kovic M, Mussa-Ivaldi FA (2006) Evaluation of robotic training forces that either
                                                     enhance or reduce error in chronic hemiparetic stroke survivors. Experimental Brain Research 168:

                                                     368–383. doi: 10.1007/s00221-005-0097-8 PMID: 16249912

                                               52.   Frascarelli F, Masia L, Di Rosa G, Petrarca M, Cappa P, et al. (2009) Robot-mediated and clinical
                                                     scales evaluation after upper limb botulinum toxin type a injection in children with hemiplegia. Journal
                                                     of Rehabilitation Medicine 41: 988–994. doi: 10.2340/16501977-0412 PMID: 19841830

                                               53.   Colombo R, Pisano F, Mazzone A, Delconte C, Micera S, et al. (2007) Design strategies to improve pa-

                                                     tient motivation during robot-aide rehabilitation. Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation 4.
                                                     PMID: 17309790

                                               54.   Dodge Y (2008) The concise encyclopedia of statistics. London: Springer.

                                               55.   Casella G, Berger RL (1990) Statistical inference. Belmont, CA: Duxbury Press.







PLOS ONE | DOI:10.1371/journal.pone.0117013        March 20, 2015                                                                                   16 / 17
                                                                                                                        Citizen Science and Rehabilitation




                                               56.   Greenberg BS, Sherry J, Lachlan K, Lucas K, Holmstrom A (2010) Orientations to video games among
                                                     gender and age groups. Simulation & Gaming 41: 238–259. doi: 10.1177/1046878108319930

                                               57.   Kafai YB (1998) From Barbie to Mortal Kombat: Gender and Computer Games, Cambridge, MA: The
                                                     MIT Press, chapter 4. pp. 90–114.

                                               58.   Kwakkel G, van Peppen R, Wagenaar RC, Dauphinee SW, Richards C, et al. (2004) Effects of aug-

                                                     mented exercise therapy time after stroke a meta-analysis. Stroke 35: 2529–2539. doi: 10.1161/01.
                                                     STR.0000143153.76460.7d PMID: 15472114

                                               59.   Ellul C, Francis L, Haklay M (2011) Engaging with local communities: a review of three years of commu-
                                                     nity mapping. Urban and Regional Data Management.

                                               60.   Trewin S, Pain H (1999) Keyboard and mouse errors due to motor disabilities. International Journal of
                                                     Human-Computer Studies 50: 109–144. doi: 10.1006/ijhc.1998.0238

                                               61.   Leversen JS, Haga M, Sigmundsson H (2012) From children to adults: motor performance across the

                                                     life-span. Plos ONE 7: e38830. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038830 PMID: 22719958

                                               62.   Globerson S, Levin N, Shtub A (1989) The impact of breaks on forgetting when performing a repetitive
                                                     task. IIE Transactions 21: 376–381. doi: 10.1080/07408178908966244

                                               63.   Förster J, Higgins ET, Bianco AT (2003) Speed/accuracy decisions in task performance: Built-in trade-
                                                     off or separate strategic concerns? Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 90: 148–
                                                     164. doi: 10.1016/S0749-5978(02)00509-5

                                               64.   Rand D, Kizony R, Weiss PTL (2008) The Sony PlayStation II EyeToy: low-cost virtual reality for use in

                                                     rehabilitation. Journal of Neurologic Physical Therapy 32: 155–163. doi: 10.1097/NPT.
                                                     0b013e31818ee779 PMID: 19265756

                                               65.   Lange B, Flynn S, Rizzo A (2009) Initial usability assessment of off-the-shelf video game consoles for
                                                     clinical game-based motor rehabilitation. Physical Therapy Reviews 14: 355–363. doi: 10.1179/

                                                     108331909X12488667117258
                                               66.   Sandlund M, Lindh Waterworth E, Häger C (2011) Using motion interactive games to promote physical

                                                     activity and enhance motor performance in children with cerebral palsy. Developmental Neurorehabil-
                                                     itation 14: 15–21. doi: 10.3109/17518423.2010.533329 PMID: 21241174

                                               67.   Prestopnik NR, Crowston K (2011) Gaming for (citizen) science: exploring motivation and data quality
                                                     in the context of crowdsourced science through the design and evaluation of a social-computational

                                                     system. In: International Conference on e-Science Workshops. IEEE, pp. 28–33. doi: 10.1109/
                                                     eScienceW.2011.14

                                               68.   Cooper S, Khatib F, Treuille A, Barbero J, Lee J, et al. (2010) Predicting protein structures with a multi-
                                                     player online game. Nature 466. doi: 10.1038/nature09304 PMID: 20686574

                                               69.   Von Ahn L, Dabbish L (2004) Labeling images with a computer game. In: Proceedings of the Special In-
                                                     terest Group on Human-Computer Interaction Conference on Human factors in Computing Systems.

                                                     ACM, pp. 319–326. doi: 10.1145/985692.985733

                                               70.   Nov O, Arazy O, Anderson D (2011) Dusting for science: motivation and participation of digital citizen
                                                     science volunteers. In: Proceedings of the 2011 iConference. ACM, pp. 68–74. doi: 10.1145/1940761.
                                                     1940771

                                               71.   Thomas KW, Velthouse BA (1990) Cognitive elements of empowerment: An interpretive model of intrin-

                                                     sic task motivation. Academy of Management Review 15: 666–681. doi: 10.5465/AMR.1990.4310926
                                               72.   Gentile D (2009) Pathological video-game use among youth ages 8 to 18: A national study. Psychologi-

                                                     cal Science 20: 594–602. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9280.2009.02340.x PMID: 19476590

                                               73.   Reinkensmeyer DJ, Pang CT, Nessler JA, Painter CC (2002) Web-based telerehabilitation for the
                                                     upper extremity after stroke. IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering 10:
                                                     102–108. doi: 10.1109/TNSRE.2002.1031978 PMID: 12236447


























PLOS ONE | DOI:10.1371/journal.pone.0117013       March 20, 2015                                                                                   17 / 17