               Load Balancing at Emergency Departments using ‘Crowdinforming’



   Load Balancing at Emergency Departments

                      using ‘Crowdinforming’

         Marcia R Friesen , Trevor Strome , Shamir Mukhi , Robert McLoed        1

                          1
                           University of Manitoba, Canada
                          2Winnipeg Regional Health Authority
                          3Canadian Network for Public Health Intelligence




Abstract

Background: Emergency Department (ED) overcrowding is an important healthcare issue
facing increasing public and regulatory scrutiny in Canada and around the world. Many

approaches to alleviate excessive waiting times and lengths of stay have been studied. In
theory, optimal ED patient flow may be assisted via balancing patient loads between EDs
(in essence spreading patients more evenly throughout this system). This investigation
utilizes simulation to explore “Crowdinforming” as a basis for a process control strategy
aimed to balance patient loads between six EDs within a mid-sized Canadian city.


Methods: Anonymous patient visit data comprising 120,000 ED patient visits over six
months to six ED facilities were obtained from the region’s Emergency Department
Information System (EDIS) to (1) determine trends in ED visits and interactions between
parameters; (2) to develop a process control strategy integrating crowdinforming; and, (3)
apply and evaluate the model in a simulated environment to explore the potential impact on
patient self-redirection and load balancing between EDs.


Results: As in reality, the data available and subsequent model demonstrated that there are
many factors that impact ED patient flow. Initial results suggest that for this particular
data set used, ED arrival rates were the most useful metric for ED ‘busyness’ in a process
control strategy, and that Emergency Department performance may benefit from load

balancing efforts.

Conclusions: The simulation supports the use of crowdinforming as a potential tool when
used in a process control strategy to balance the patient loads between EDs. The work also
revealed that the value of several parameters intuitively expected to be meaningful metrics
of ED ‘busyness’ was not evident, highlighting the importance of finding parameters

meaningful within one’s particular data set.          The information provided in the
crowdinforming model is already available in a local context at some ED sites. The
extension to a wider dissemination of information via an Internet web service accessible by
smart phones is readily achievable and not a technological obstacle. Similarly, the system
could be extended to help direct patients by including future estimates or predictions in the

crowdinformed data.     The contribution of the simulation is to allow for effective policy
evaluation to better inform the public of ED ‘busyness’ as part of their decision making
process in attending an emergency department. In effect, this is a means of providing
additional decision support insights garnered from a simulation, prior to a real world
implementation.


                                                                                         1

    Online Journal of Public Health Informatics * ISSN http://ojphi.org* Vol.3, No. 2, 2011
                 M. Friesen et al. / Load Balancing at Emergency Departments using “Crowdinforming”


1.Background


1.1   Emergency Department Overcrowding

Emergency Department (ED) overcrowding, manifest in long patient wait times and
excessive lengths of stay in hospital EDs, is a chronic public health concern in that it
negatively impacts patient experiences and, potentially, their health outcomes, healthcare
worker experiences, and system efficiencies.      Reducing waiting times and potentially
improving efficiencies can be fostered through the use of information and communication

technologies in the delivery of services and resource management, as demonstrated by the
prevalence of e-health initiatives that span the off-site delivery of care (telehealth), robotic
surgery, mobile health applications, electronic medical records and region-wide records
integration.

Patient wait times, excessive lengths of stay, and ED overcrowding receive considerable

attention within healthcare administration and from the general public. Debates on how best
to address these problems have been ongoing for several decades [1][2][3] and will likely
continue into the foreseeable future. Factors related to ED overcrowding and excessive wait
times are known to be complex. They include internal factors such as EDs that are too small,
difficulties in transferring admitted patients out of the ED, staff shortages, and delays in
consultative and diagnostic services; external factors include increasing patient volumes and

increasing complexity and acuity of cases [4][5][6][7].

Many of the approaches that have been tried to reduce ED wait-times and lengths of stay
involve addressing intra-ED processes. Familiar approaches include minor treatment streams
(‘fast-tracks’) for low-acuity patients [8][9][10], and re-conceptualization of the treatment
model [11], such as team triage [12]. It is also known that patient perceptions of wait times

and service delivery are important factors to consider [13].

Another approach to address these issues is controlling arrivals at EDs. For example,
Emergency Medical Services (EMS) dispatchers may direct crews to a particular ED based
on locale, patient acuity, and facility specialization. More recently, a pilot has been initiated
in the region to transport stable and non-emergent patients to an urgent care facility as

opposed to an ED; it is these patients who previously waited in an ED at the non-acute end of
the triage scale [14]. This may have the effect of improving patient flow and helping to
alleviate EMS offload delays and getting paramedics on the road faster.

1.2   Measures of Overcrowding for Modeling and Simulation


Modelling and simulation have been available to the study of the dynamics of emergency
care for several decades, yet the resultant efforts are sparse and relate to many aspects of ED
operations, including staff scheduling, patient flow, and departmental performance metrics
[15][16][17]. Several studies also address patient loads in particular, although the underlying
modelling methodologies and approaches are dissimilar from this work [18][19][20].


In model-building, researchers agree that usable and standardized definitions of
overcrowding need to be established [21][22], as well as for the concepts inherent in
overcrowding, namely ‘busyness’ of an ED, and what constitutes a patient surge [22].
Various researchers have put forward proposals for measures of crowding, generally
inclusive of patient loads or volumes, patient acuity distributions, physician resources, and


                                                                                           2
     Online Journal of Public Health Informatics * ISSN 1947-2579 * http://ojphi.org * Vol.3, No. 2, 2011
                 M. Friesen et al. / Load Balancing at Emergency Departments using “Crowdinforming”


bed resources [24][26][27]. In all cases, it is clear that variables associated with crowding
and busyness are complex and interact with one another, and efforts are focussed on building
reliable conceptual frameworks [27].       In [24][25], patient arrival rates were used in
quantifying measures of crowding and busyness, which this current work also supports.


This work develops a simulation model based on a process control strategy that relies on
crowdinforming as an input; it is one of the first efforts at using real ED data in a feedback
control manner to better understand the outcome of making real-time ED data available to the
general public.   In practical manifestation, such a strategy would provide patients with
information to help with their decision to visit a hospital ED. In theory, actual patient loads

at and between EDs may be balanced (resulting in streamlined patient flow), and patients’
perceptions of their ED experience may be enhanced as a result of improved patient flow due
to the load-balancing effect of crowdinforming.

Simulations are an appropriate means of gaining this insight because potential impacts can be
determined and evaluated without impacting real EDs or patients. When using actual patient

data to feed a simulation, one must consider that the results may not generalize to other
regions. If this investigation were to be replicated elsewhere, different and/or additional
characteristics would need to be evaluated [21]. The use of simulation is justified; however,
as our data appears consistent within the regional intuitions, so work to develop the model
was undertaken.


The balancing of ED loads is a complex multifaceted problem; redirection of patients is just
one piece of the solution. The patient redirection simulated here would be typical of patients
with non-emergent conditions able to consult a web- or smart-phone based service that
provides insight into the “busyness’ of an ED prior to deciding upon which to attend. The
aspect being explored deals with using data that is becoming available, such that an informed
decision can be made in the case of lower acuity patient self redirection.


1.3   Crowdinforming

The concept of Crowdinforming refers to the delivery of relevant information to the general
public, which in non-critical cases can be accessed prior to a pending ED visit. This
information is then used to decide which ED to attend. Crowdinforming is derived as a

variant of the better-known concepts of crowdsourcing and crowdcasting, which recently
have been used in biosurveillance applications [28][29]. One of the fundamental tenets of
crowdsourcing is that the feedback loop needs to be closed, as information mined through
crowdsourcing flows back to the crowd that generated it (crowdcasting), presumably to
accrue benefit. Crowdsourcing has become a standard marketing practice enabled through
the Internet and as such is becoming a familiar process from a user perspective.


There are emerging healthcare examples of the crowdinforming concept in practice. These
include pre-hospital ambulance redirection based on internet-accessible real-time ED loads
in Western Australia [30], and a service by which cellular phone users in Texas, USA can
text a common number and receive a return text indicating the expected wait time at the
nearest ED [31]. The crowdinforming simulation presented here would augment the types of

smartphone apps that are being developed to assist people in selecting the closest ED [32].
Overall, direct communication with the public is recommended as a way to enhance the
responsiveness to directives regarding patient flow [33].



                                                                                             3
     Online Journal of Public Health Informatics * ISSN 1947-2579 * http://ojphi.org * Vol.3, No. 2, 2011
                  M. Friesen et al. / Load Balancing at Emergency Departments using “Crowdinforming”


This work contributes to efforts in understanding and reducing ED overcrowding: This work
illustrates one potential avenue of contributing to this goal by simulating the effect of making
information available to the public, allowing them a degree of informed choice on which ED
to attend.


Overall, finding policies that balance loads among collaborating ED facilities is part of efforts
in many systems that explicitly employ algorithms for that purpose. In addition, there is little
counter evidence in any realm whereby an unbalanced system would behave in an optimal
manner. ED load balancing is complicated by the highly stochastic and unpredictable
behavior of patients and their needs. The system we are proposing is a negative feedback
control system as opposed to running open loop. With extremely high probability, these

negative feedback systems are always preferable to open loop control systems. As such, if
these techniques can be employed they should prefaced by insight gained by modeling and
simulation as more analytical solutions are likely not to exist, certainly not with the ease of
which a model and simulation can be developed.



2.Methods

The objective of this exploratory study was to investigate the application of existing available
data and emerging data feeds towards developing an auxiliary ED process control strategy. A
further objective was to integrate crowd-informed data into the strategy, this will allow for
the exploration of the potential effect (via simulation) of the process control strategy on the
balancing of patient loads between hospital EDs. Patient load balancing was considered

primarily as the relative equalization of patient loads between individual facilities (according
to respective capacities). Patient load balancing should also consider the ‘smoothing’ of
variability in patient loads at a facility over time (i.e. surge mitigation). However, this work
considered primarily the inter-institutional impacts (vs. intra-institutional impacts) as a
primary validation of the model.

The work progressed in three stages:

   (1) statistical analyses of the data (descriptive statistics), to better understand the data and
       to test some intuitive expectations relative to variable relationships (section 2);
   (2) the iterative development of a preliminary process control strategy, built upon
       crowdinformed parameters (section 3.1); and,
   (3) the simulation of the process control strategy, and preliminary outcomes (section 3.2).


Data for this investigation were based on six months of patient visit data taken from the
Emergency Department Information System (EDIS) of the health authority of a mid-sized
Canadian city, spanning January through June 2009. The source included approximately
120,000 patient visits from six EDs. Data included gender and age of the patient, and
timestamps of various milestones related to arrival, triage and registration, and discharge
time. The data essentially comprise a trace file of events that have taken place. Initially and
intuitively the authors expected the most meaningful input into a strategy for self-initiated

patient redirection to be patient waiting times and length of stay.

Data are now being collected that, in addition to the above, includes timestamps of the
beginning and the duration of individual treatment events, specialty consultation, and/or
diagnostic services. At the time of writing, only the more rudimentary data set was available,
which nonetheless was the appropriate starting point for modeling efforts aimed at improving


                                                                                              4
     Online Journal of Public Health Informatics * ISSN 1947-2579 * http://ojphi.org * Vol.3, No. 2, 2011
                  M. Friesen et al. / Load Balancing at Emergency Departments using “Crowdinforming”


the efficiencies between EDs (inter-institutional). The forthcoming, expanded data which
include specific trajectories through a particular ED will potentially facilitate intra-
institutional modeling efforts. Data were fully anonymized and blinded to ensure patient
anonymity, and data handling and storage security measures were taken to ensure patient
confidentiality. Any patient identifiers were removed prior to receipt of the data, and ED

sites were masked by labels A through F.

For purposes of this initial investigation, all sites were treated equal in terms of bed capacity,
although it is known that the health region consists of two larger tertiary centres and four
community centres. This was done for modeling and visualization purposes only with the
conjecture being that if load balancing was not achievable in this simplified modeling

scenario, it is unlikely to be effective once varying capacities were included.


3.Results and Discussion

3.1   Initial Data Analysis


Descriptive statistics were applied on the EDIS data set, calculating measures of central
tendency and variability for various parameters. This was done to gain insights into basic
variable relationships and to confirm the fidelity of the data.

Fundamental to the concept of patient load-balancing is a concept or metric of ‘busyness’ of
an ED, which is often manifest in circumstances of excessive patient wait times, facility

overcrowding, and excessive lengths of stay.         The preliminary analyses attempted to
conceptualize ED ‘busyness’ relative to a range of variables in the available data, in order to
determine the most meaningful variable or combination of variables for further use in a
process control strategy for this particular data.

As an initial insight into the nature of the data, a small sample (two months) of the data set is
summarized in Table I. Table I summarizes the average patient length of stay (LOS) over 4-

hr non-overlapping windows for each ED. Length of stay was calculated from the data as the
total time from initial registration and triage to the time of patient disposition (i.e., admission,
discharge, transfer, deceased). Since limited data were available that broke down the total
LOS into wait time and treatment time, we initially elected to use the overall LOS as a
correlation to patient waiting time. Other time intervals (such as door-to-triage, or time
waited to see a physician) could have been employed, but at time of writing, such levels of

granularity were not as reliable within the data as the parameters from which to calculate total
LOS. Causes of variation in the data include site-based process differences and individual
user practices (for example, batch data entry by healthcare workers after a set of patients, vs.
more automated data entry after each individual patient, resulting in different timestamps for
equal service processes), and simple data entry and system usage errors. These factors also
confound a comparison of intra-institutional impacts, and were a further motivation to
maintain the current focus on the inter-institutional scale. All facilities exhibited similar

trends, that being very little variation in patient LOS.







                                                                                              5
     Online Journal of Public Health Informatics * ISSN 1947-2579 * http://ojphi.org * Vol.3, No. 2, 2011
                 M. Friesen et al. / Load Balancing at Emergency Departments using “Crowdinforming”





             Table 1: Average Length of Stay and Average Number of Patients

              Facility        Avg. LOS (hrs)     St.Dev. of LOS     Avg. Number
                                                      (hrs)            Patients

                 A                  3.8               1.43               19.7
                 B                  7.9               2.35               23.4
                 C                  9.2               4.49               12.8
                 D                  6.9               2.68               15.0
                 E                  9.7               4.88               13.5
                 F                  9.0               3.01               18.1


An intuitive approach to establishing a ‘busyness’ metric would be to consider associating
LOS with the number of patients waiting. This observation - in addition to being intuitive -
has also been reported elsewhere [27]. The data facilitated initial investigations of a model
that would fit a length of stay duration to the number of people waiting. In this manner when

a redirection to another facility occurs, the original data are modified to reflect a reduced
LOS at the facility the person would have initially chosen, as well as a slight increase in the
LOS at the facility of chosen destination. This was the basis of the preliminary conjecture
that average LOS, as a function of patients waiting, would be a meaningful ‘busyness’ metric

and a meaningful variable in a process control strategy.





















                  Figure 1: Average LOS at Facility B vs. Patients Waiting

Figure 1 shows a representative plot of this fit of average LOS and number of patients for
Facility B, based on six months of EDIS data. There is no directly observable positive linear
                                                                 2
relationship between number of patients waiting and the LOS (R = 0.008). This is counter-
intuitive and not as reported in [27]. This may reflect that during peak ED hours (between
10:00am and 10:00pm) there are increased staffing levels in the ED and ancillary
departments. Also, several sites operate Minor Treatment Areas (also known as “Fast

Tracks”) to deal with increased volumes of less-acute patients during peak ED hours. Similar
results were found for each of the six hospitals within the regional health authority, in which
the best fit line was relatively horizontal.


                                                                                           6
     Online Journal of Public Health Informatics * ISSN 1947-2579 * http://ojphi.org * Vol.3, No. 2, 2011
                  M. Friesen et al. / Load Balancing at Emergency Departments using “Crowdinforming”


The initial exploratory strategy of directly using average LOS data as a control input would
result in patients regionally being redirected to Facility A, with no concomitant reduction in
length of stay at the remaining facilities. This is intuitively untenable, and the next analysis
took time-of-day into account, to reflect time-varying healthcare worker resources (staffing

levels).

With this inclusion, Figure 2 reflects the average LOS at Facility F between 0:00-4:00 AM
and between 12:00-4:00 PM. Even though the LOS is comparable, the throughput is
considerably higher during the day, assumed to be a consequence of increased staff, increased
availability of ancillary services and a greater number of non-urgent patients.





















          Figure 2: Length of Stay at Facility F, 0:00-4:00 AM and 12:00-4:00 PM

Again, the anticipated positive linear relationship between patient load and LOS was not
borne out by the data. The follow-on analysis refined the LOS estimates by stratifying triage
scores. (Canadian EDs typically employ the Canadian Triage Acuity Scale, CTAS, which is
a 5-point scale with 1 being most acute or serious and 5 being the least acute.) CTAS level 3
was chosen for analysis, as it captures the single largest group of patients (34% of all ED

visits within the data). CTAS 3 also reflects the triage score most often assigned to patients
presenting with influenza-like illness, and the issues of ED load-balancing (surge mitigation)
become particularly relevant in outbreaks of ILI. Data were also culled for outliers, defined
as data points more than three standard deviations removed from the mean.

The results analysing the Wait Time at an ED for a specific triage score (3) continued to

discount a positive linear relationship between LOS and patient load, where this relationship
was the basis of the preliminary conjecture. This is unfortunate from a control perspective,
indicating that the number of patients in the ED is not necessarily the best measure of
“busyness”. It could be argued that a better measure of “busyness” may be more easily
associated with a patient’s wait to be seen (WTBS). Although WTBS also seems intuitively
reasonable, it unfortunately suffered from similar drawbacks as the LOS as a measure of

busyness.

As a check on this conjecture, more extensive data were used from a later data set where the
total LOS was detailed to include WTBS. For all six hospital EDs, the WTBS and LOS are


                                                                                              7
     Online Journal of Public Health Informatics * ISSN 1947-2579 * http://ojphi.org * Vol.3, No. 2, 2011
                  M. Friesen et al. / Load Balancing at Emergency Departments using “Crowdinforming”


moderately correlated with coefficients ranging from 0.42 to 0.62. Figure 3 illustrates a
running average WTBS and LOS at facility B with a 10-patient running average (as an
average of those waiting and for display).



















  Figure 3: Average Waiting To Be Seen and Length Of Stay (running average) over a one
                                         month period.


Based on these initial investigations, average LOS and average WTBS durations were
discounted as possible control parameters. A known drawback is that neither average LOS
nor WTBS is useful as a real-time control parameter in this data set, as these averages lag
behind data that would be available at a given instant of time. Nonetheless, average LOS and

average WTBS up to a point in time (running average) were investigated, with a correlation
coefficient of 0.04 for the complete data set, and a correlation coefficient of 0.45 when
controlled for triage scores.

In a further exploration of a meaningful metric of ‘busyness’, patient arrival rates and
departure rates from an ED were considered and found to have some degree of exploitable

structure. Patient arrival rates’ influence on busyness was also supported by other researchers
[24][25][26]. In this work, regression analyses are in progress to quantify this influence for
the current data set. Figure 4 illustrates the near instantaneous patient arrival and departure
rates as seen by facility A for a representative 180-hour slice of data. This plot becomes
slightly less erratic if the arrivals are shifted by the average LOS, which in the case of Facility
A is approximately 4 hours. As expected, the arrival rates and departure rates are correlated

to one another, albeit shifted in time.















                                                                                               8
     Online Journal of Public Health Informatics * ISSN 1947-2579 * http://ojphi.org * Vol.3, No. 2, 2011
                  M. Friesen et al. / Load Balancing at Emergency Departments using “Crowdinforming”



















                     Figure 4: Arrival and Departure Rates at Facility A.

The preceding discussion outlined efforts to obtain understanding of the data.           Initial

conjectures that average LOS and WTBS would be meaningful metrics of ‘busyness’ and
thus meaningful variables in a process control strategy for the purpose of load balancing were
not borne out by the data. Several other analyses were performed but not presented here, as
they likewise discounted the original conjectures. A summary of the exploratory analysis is
provided in Table II. It is acknowledged that these results are counter-intuitive and at times

contrary to other published findings; however, these results are reflective of the particular
data set used.

The approaches considered above illustrate the difficulty of developing a control strategy that
relies on straight forward estimates of ‘busyness’. Table II summarizes the interim results.



             Table 2: Potential ‘busyness’ metrics and their utility in redirection


         ‘Busyness’ Metric           Meaningful here as a            Rationale
                                    redirection parameter
         Number of Patient                    No                LOS not a function of
         Waiting                                                  Number Waiting
         Average LOS                          No                LOS not a function of
                                                                  Number Waiting
         Average WTBS                         No               Somewhat correlated to
                                                                    Average LOS
         Patient Arrival Rate             Potentially          Literature [21][27][35],

                                                                      Intuition


Going forward, a metric of ‘busyness’ through a process of elimination is taken to be the
patient arrival rates as opposed to absolute quantities such as average length of stay or total

waiting hours, as this metric appears to have at a qualitative relationship to patient load. The
arrival rates from various hospitals were used from the trace file (original data) to re-evaluate
a patient-initiated redirection control strategy. Modelling control strategies based on trace file
data is common in many areas of optimization [34]. In the case of Internet or web traffic for

example, one often has a trace file or log to work with, using it as input to a simulation to
better evaluate the performance of an algorithm one would like to investigate. A proposed

                                                                                              9

     Online Journal of Public Health Informatics * ISSN 1947-2579 * http://ojphi.org * Vol.3, No. 2, 2011
                  M. Friesen et al. / Load Balancing at Emergency Departments using “Crowdinforming”


algorithm (control strategy) then works from the trace file to see if throughput can be
improved. During the process, the trace file is modified as if requests were sent to alternative
services. In effect, this can be articulated as a system for simulating dynamic load balancing

on various services produced using trace files of real service loads.

An additional consideration in using arrival rate as our “busyness” metric was derived from
[21] where the authors indicated that “autocorrelation in the models for wait time and LOS is
consistent with our intuition that process times are affected by prior patient arrivals” and that

“future work will focus on discrete event simulation modeling”. This is similar to the case
presented here; we have data that appears consistent within the regional intuitions and are
using the data as input to simulation. Further consideration also came from the literature
[27][35], where in particular number of patients from the ED was associated with the daily
mean length of stay for all ED patients [35].



3.2   Process Control Strategy Development built upon Crowdinforming

Based on the initial insights, a preliminary process control strategy upon which to apply a

crowdinforming simulation was developed. Intuitively, LOS, WTBS, arrival rates, origin of
enquiry, and ED capacity should lend themselves to a model for crowdinforming to be built
with increasing fidelity. However, it is crucial that ‘busyness’ metrics be extracted from real
data, as they may be context-specific and/or counter intuitive as evidenced here. The model
for patient decision making is a simple discrete event simulator, where each patient is
individually governed by the stochastic decision process of Figure 5. The process of Figure 5

is essentially for fair weighted crowdinforming diversions. A person being modeled either
proceeds to the ED they would have gone to normally or consults a service and makes a
weighted fair decision as to which ED to attend. In this model they will probabilistically
attend the least busy.






















                        Figure 5: Patient Redirection Decision Process





                                                                                              10
     Online Journal of Public Health Informatics * ISSN 1947-2579 * http://ojphi.org * Vol.3, No. 2, 2011
                  M. Friesen et al. / Load Balancing at Emergency Departments using “Crowdinforming”


In conceptualizing ‘busyness’ in terms of patient arrival rates, some of the anticipated effects
of patient-initiated redirection were observed. The redirection policy model was based on
five minute intervals of data availability and updates.         The redirection policy in this

simulation was straight-forward: a percentage of patients (e.g. 75%) were set to consult the
posted arrival rates and then probabilistically self-redirect to the facility with the lowest
present arrival rate. Figure 6 illustrates the raw arrival rates at the six regional EDs. The
horizontal axes in Figures 6 indicate serial 12-hour increments.





















        Figure 6: Arrival Rates at six Facilities with No Crowdinformed Redirection.

The main observation is that without any form of patient redirection modeled, there is a
reasonable degree of diversity in the arrival rates at any particular facility. The spikes

represent arrival surges at the individual facilities that have been conjectured to contribute to
crowding and increased waiting times [22][36].

The output from the decision process (Figure 5) then modifies the trace file accordingly.
Figure 7 is the result of running the individual stochastic decision process (Figure 5) with

input from the trace file to provide the weighting for the decision process. In this manner a
patient probabilistically self redirects to alternative facilities weighed by the arrival rates as
illustrated in Table III. Without incorporating capacity the ideal output would be for all
facilities to identical with little variation about the moving average. Figure 7 approximates
the former but illustrates that the latter is not substantively impacted by the control strategy
modeled.















                                                                                              11
     Online Journal of Public Health Informatics * ISSN 1947-2579 * http://ojphi.org * Vol.3, No. 2, 2011
                  M. Friesen et al. / Load Balancing at Emergency Departments using “Crowdinforming”


















 Figure 7: Arrival and Departure Rates at six Facilities with Weighted Fair Crowdinforming
                                 Redirection (multiple passes).


As the data are time varying, samples from weighted fair redirection, sorting redirect and the

raw trace file were transformed to the frequency domain (FFT) and digitally filtered,
essentially removing the circadian fundamental. As the data clearly exhibited a circadian
autocorrelation component, transformation to the frequency domain was the simplest means
of its removal. More complicated analyses could have been undertaken but as we were only
interested in the variance about the moving average, this was the most straightforward. This
allows one to estimate the variance from the periodic moving average. The standard deviation

arising from the inverse transform was approximately 0.41 for the raw trace file, 0.50 for the
weighted fair redirection and for Hospital B (selected arbitrarily). It was somewhat
unexpected that the weighed fair redirection performed more poorly in terms of variance than
the original trace file, even though an element of load balancing appears evident from Figure
7. Figure 7 re-adjusts the trace file over several passes through the trace file to more fully
represent the steady state associated with this control strategy as opposed to more transient

behaviour as would be the case if the crowdinforming policy were instantly switched on.

In a more refined model to be explored in future work, the data would allow for an aspect of
travel time to be considered, as an EDIS patient record can be configured to include prefixed
postal code information (approximate neighbourhood of origin); for this study, the postal
code was sanitized from the records. Also, although not investigated here, an exponential

weighted moving average (EWMA) of arrival rates might improve the outcomes and be
easily extracted as well.

At the time of writing, only one of the hospitals included in this study has an ED wait-times
display “dashboard” deployed in the ED waiting room. Currently, this dashboard displays the
number of patients in the ED waiting room, average waiting time of patients in the waiting

room, and expected wait time to see a physician. Information on this dashboard is updated in
near-real-time from the EDIS database, and the dashboards are expected to roll-out to all EDs
in the region within the next several months. This dashboard has been found to be of value to
both patients and staff within these EDs and our basic premise is that this data may also be of
use outside of the EDs themselves.





                                                                                              12
     Online Journal of Public Health Informatics * ISSN 1947-2579 * http://ojphi.org * Vol.3, No. 2, 2011
                 M. Friesen et al. / Load Balancing at Emergency Departments using “Crowdinforming”


Our model extends this notion of a wait-times dashboard and conjectures that in a reasonably
short period of time, these data could be made available through a web service, such that an

individual would be able to query the hospital “dashboards” from an “ED Wait Times”
website over the internet with any browser, be it mobile cellular or wired. In addition, a text
service could be established where a user would text a notable number (for example,
311EDWait) and receive a list informing of anticipated waits or load at various facilities.


In late 2009, real-time displays of the ED dashboard data were installed in the dispatch centre
of the city’s Fire and Paramedic Services, in order to facilitate pre-hospital re-direction of
ambulances    and   emergency    vehicles.     However,    when    considering   large-scale
crowdinforming to an entire city’s population, modelling and simulation provide an
exploratory investigation into the potential effects of a crowdinformed system, without the

cost and potential disturbances to a system under endemic stress.

In this simulated crowdinforming scenario, a proactive decision is made by a relatively low-
acuity patient who intends to visit a hospital ED for a non-emergent medical issue. In
addition to the stochastic process of deciding upon going to an emergency department, each

patient is also provided with estimates of load, proxied by patient arrival rates (for simulation
purposes). These data are available and easily instrumented within the controls being
modelled. As an illustration, assume there are four hospitals with average arrival rates of 5,
10, 15, and 20 patients/hr. In the model a potential patient would create a biased roulette
wheel to guide their probabilistic decision once they have elected to go to an emergency

department. The associated normalized probabilities associated with informed self-initiated
redirection are shown in Table III. The arrival rates (Table III) would be provided by the
hospitals and made available to the public through a web service, smart phone app or text
service as discussed above.    The “Arrival Rates +1” models the impact of adding the
decision-making patient to each facility, as if the patient were attending all EDs. The table
then calculates the probability of the individual patient actually going to the respective

facilities. That is to say, the facility becomes a slightly less attractive destination if you
choose to direct yourself there, in effect biasing that facility to be slightly busier. From a
numerical perspective, it also prevents a division by zero in the event the arrival rate at a
facility is zero arrivals/hour. In reality, the numbers are only for simulation purposes only.
Conveyance of a selected ‘busyness metric’ (whatever it is) would have to be considerably

more user friendly, such as number of signal reception bars as seen on a cell phone, or a red-
yellow-green-light scale.

           Table 3. Informed Emergency Department Self Redirect Probabilities


                     Emergency    Emergency      Emergency     Emergency      Total
                    Department Department       Department     Department
                          1            2             3              4
       Arrival
       Rates (/hr)        5            10            15            20

       Arrival
       Rates +1           6            11            16            21
       (/hr)
       1/over            1/6          1/11          1/16           1/21       0.368

       Probability      0.45          0.25          0.17           0.13        1.0



                                                                                         13

     Online Journal of Public Health Informatics * ISSN 1947-2579 * http://ojphi.org * Vol.3, No. 2, 2011
                   M. Friesen et al. / Load Balancing at Emergency Departments using “Crowdinforming”


Ideally, Table III would combine estimates of travel time and patient load in an additive
manner as a linear combination weighted appropriately as in equation (1). Within the general

population, a person presented with statistical data would likely preferentially choose the
facility with the lowest arrival rate, as people are typically not probabilistic in nature. If this
were the case, the situation would by default look similar to where a simple sort was used for
redirection. Additionally, equation (1) accounts for varying perceptions of equal durations of
wait time: people may perceive 30 minutes travel time more favourably than 30 minutes of

wait time, perhaps due to the psychology of the perception of control (actively driving a car
vs. passively sitting in a chair).

In equation 1, N represents the number of ED facilities. A weighting has been assigned to
reflect a probabilistic decision that incorporates both travel time and arrival rates. Here

reflects a person’s decision to consider redirection. The term  weights the probabilistic
component associated with patient arrival rates as indicators of “busyness”. The term 
weights the probabilistic component associated with travel time associated with distance d,           i
where d ripresents the distance to facility i. The parameter that would be crowdinformed
from a regional hospital authority would be the term associated with ‘busyness’. In this data

set, the ‘busyness’ metric is patient arrival rates denoted  , wheie represints the arrival
rate at facility i.If used in a mobile or web based application, the distance and estimated
travel time can be extracted from many geolocation travel time estimation services readily
available.


For example, if one were to discount travel time and only use the measure associated with
busyness (i.e. patient arrival rates),          =0. If the data as illustrated in Table III
were then used, the person would choose ED1 with a probability of 0.45. If in addition,
    i.e.,       was a 75% chance that the person would consider self redirection) the

probability of the person choosing ED1 would be 0.75*0.45 = 0.33. This would model
approximately a 33% chance that the person would redirect to ED1.

This also presents an opportunity to introduce a capacity parameter as in equation 2. The nice
feature about this type of measure is that it is relative between facilities. The capacity

parameter would be arrived at experientially for each institution, although back-casting from
available data may be a starting point. As capacity would is not subject to change at an
institution for prolonged periods of time, its actual value in this simulation is arbitrary.




                                                                              (1)


Using such a method, the patients make a probabilistic decision weighted by the least
anticipated wait, inferred from the busyness of the EDs derived from the near real-time
patient arrival rates. As a consequence, the overall surge seen between hospitals is dampened
by the behaviour of informed individuals.



                                                            (2)


A statistical measure associated with mean and variance indicates that the load balancing is
statistically significant given our behavioural assumptions, where an inference of estimated

                                                                                                    14

      Online Journal of Public Health Informatics * ISSN 1947-2579 * http://ojphi.org * Vol.3, No. 2, 2011
                  M. Friesen et al. / Load Balancing at Emergency Departments using “Crowdinforming”


“busyness” probabilistically influences a person’s decision in attending a particular
emergency department. The overall effect is that of a low pass filter, smoothing out the peaks
and valleys in space and, to some extent, in time. Filtering in time is expected to result from
incorporation of an estimate of travel time as indicated in Equation 1.


Although preliminary, this work represents one of the first modelled instances of the potential
of crowdinforming in providing a policymaker with a simulation to aid decision support. The
decision would be to create public access to "dashboard" type information that is currently
available in emergency departments or electronic records. The publicly available “dashboard”
would be accessible via the web or 3G smartphone.          Crowdinforming serves to filter the

simulated patient surges at a given facility by balancing patient load between facilities (to
each facility’s respective capacity). As the win-waiting-room “dashboards” are a relatively
new concept currently under evaluation it is unlikely that exactly the same data would be
presented to a patient considering self redirection at this time.

3.4   Limitations


The model is preliminary and currently uses one metric – patient arrival rates – as an
indicator of ‘busyness’ and as the basis for crowdinforming. Intuitively expected metrics
such as the number of patients waiting as well as average LOS were not found to be effective
as an input into a process control strategy for patient redirection. Additional statistical
analysis needs to be carried out on the trace file data, to facilitate a refinement of the model to

account for the interplay of multiple variables. Additionally, forthcoming EDIS data will
provide further breakdowns of various waiting and treatment phases, which will facilitate a
more precise model. It is unlikely that a simple unified model of “busyness” across all EDs
across varying hospital authorities would suffice, particularly in scenarios where some
indication of real time “busyness” is to be fed back to the general community.


A further significant limitation associated with research of this nature is that stochastic
models of behaviour have to be estimated. Modelling social dynamics is a difficult and messy
problem; however, insights garnered from simulation and modelling are nonetheless useful
and would be used in support of an otherwise best-guess decision.

Not all patients, in reality can easily redistribute themselves to all sites equally. For example,

the most acute patients (i.e., CTAS 1 or 2) need to get to the nearest or specialized ED
immediately, and most likely by ambulance. Additionally, these cases wait very little once
they arrive at a hospital, regardless of which site. To further complicate this, certain types of
conditions may get directed to a specific site. In the health authority represented by the data,
trauma and stroke cases are most often directed to site B whereas cardiac cases are most
likely sent to site F when practical and in the best interests of the patient. Patients assessed at

CTAS level 3 are most likely sick enough to desire to go to the nearest ED, whereas the
patients assessed at CTAS level 4 and 5 (i.e., least acute or serious) are likely the most
sensitive to wait times and length of stay issues and would benefit by targeting an ED with a
Minor Treatment Area (MTA). In addition, several of the larger and busier sites have
resources/services not available at smaller sites, so a length of stay at one site may not be
same if a patient chooses a different site with a different scope of services available. Future

models would likely need to take into account these considerations. Other types of data may
also be useful to the person using a crowdinforming service could also reflect resources at the
facility. For example, in the case of a major laceration whether a plastic surgeon were in site



                                                                                              15
     Online Journal of Public Health Informatics * ISSN 1947-2579 * http://ojphi.org * Vol.3, No. 2, 2011
                  M. Friesen et al. / Load Balancing at Emergency Departments using “Crowdinforming”


or in the case of a broken arm or wrist whether a physician were on site who would be able to
set the break.

The present framework appropriately considers system-wide impacts with simplified

assumptions on respective ED capacity, prior to intra-institutional simulation and other
institutional refinements. The framework developed here allows policies to be simulated and
evolved, adding a qualitative assessment to decisions that may otherwise be experiential or
best intent. This work is one of the first demonstrations of the crowdinforming intervention as
a variant of the broader concept of crowdsourcing, and it demonstrates the role that similar
technologies which provide crowdinformed decisions will continue to play in the future.


It is important to note that this work did not set out to develop a model to fit observed data,
nor to develop a ‘busyness’ model of an ED. The objective was to develop a process control
strategy built on crowdinforming, and in doing so, a meaningful metric of ‘busyness’ is
required, which was expected to be somewhat self evident. Thus, this work included an
exploration into the data in order to define a meaningful metric for this data set. This

exploration is a pre-requisite to the development of a meaningful process control strategy for
crowdinforming. The work implied that the input parameters (in this case, a ‘busyness’
metric) may be ‘data-unique’ and must be defined and verified for each respective data set.
Furthermore, the validity of patient arrival rates as an input parameter has not been
established definitively; however, the work did indicate that other parameters are –
surprisingly – not necessarily a good metric within this particular data set within this problem

domain.

This study was limited to data from one regional health authority. Specific results of similar
analyses at other regions would likely be different. A limitation of modeling is that the
assumption of ‘busyness” (wait time and LOS) is consistent with our intuition that process
times are affected by prior patient arrivals.


These limitations imply that data collected from a multiple-ED system have to be carefully
considered as issues and conditions at other regions are likely to be different (as they are,
often, between EDs within the same region). However, as data become more widely
available, there will be increased opportunity and additional tools available for its analysis
and improved interpretation of causality concerning “busyness”. Similar considerations also

apply to the feedback control strategy one may be interested in. Fortunately, there are an
increasing number of modeling and simulation tools and methods readily amenable to this
type of policy modeling.

Ideally for patient self redirection one of the means of providing a meaningful “busyness”
metric would be streaming video of each facility. The technology now exists to do this but is

unlikely to ever be widely implemented for a variety of reasons (primarily related to patient
privacy and security). Other alternatives are to crowdsource ED visits directly from patients
at various EDs, mobile applications and back end web services already exist for this type of
collection and dissemination. Limitations again would be related to the trustworthiness of the
reporting (as patients may be tempted to overstate their wait in an effort to redirect others
away from the facility in the attempt to reduce their wait and service time) as well as the

potential skew due to specific demographics that are more apt to use mobile communications
and to participate in crowdsourced efforts.




                                                                                             16
     Online Journal of Public Health Informatics * ISSN 1947-2579 * http://ojphi.org * Vol.3, No. 2, 2011
                  M. Friesen et al. / Load Balancing at Emergency Departments using “Crowdinforming”


As previously mentioned, this problem domain is very complex with myriad variables. As
data systems improve, and the ability to extract consistent and meaningful data from these
systems follows suite, a more detailed insight into the complexities of ED operations will be
gleaned from the data. As more data is available, investigators will be able to exploit Stein’s
paradox where an estimate of “busyness” is made more accurate when three or more

parameters are estimated simultaneously. These parameters may be apparently unrelated, but
for example could include arrival rates as discussed above augmented with the number of
paramedics waiting for their patients to be seen by an ED doctor.

A final limitation of the model presented here is that since the input was extracted from real
arrival rates at various facilities (trace file), there is not a directly observable output such as

resulting average LOS as a consequence of the redirection. The indirect output is a reduction
in arrival spikes associated with arrivals without patient self-redirection, as compared to the
arrivals associated with patient self-redirection. Although the modelled process is stochastic,
the underlying principle is that of negative feedback control system thereby balancing the ED
loads across facilities and attenuating arrival spikes.


4.Conclusions

This work illustrates the role that data-driven modelling can play in developing policy or
supporting public health decisions. The investigation derives a preliminary process control
strategy upon which to model the effects of self-initiated patient redirection on hospital
patient loads.   The work illustrates how one specific intervention – that of proactive
information dissemination or crowdinforming – can potentially provide a degree of process

control in the form of patients’ self-initiated re-direction, resulting in load balancing at
emergency departments. The work illustrates that meaningful strategies rely on appropriate
data- or context-specific choices in the variable or variables chosen as metrics of ‘busyness’
and consequently to their broadcast through crowdinforming.               The results of this
investigation are not intended to be specific recommendations for a regional health authority,
but rather illustrate a flexible framework around which applications of this type can be better
evaluated and their potential outcomes assessed. The benefit of simulation is to allow a policy

or decision maker to gain insight into what may occur and be better prepared than in the
implementation of a crowdinforming policy without modeling or simulation.

The preliminary model was derived from simple statistical analyses of the available EDIS
data, in order to test support for preliminary conjectures. As the initial conjectures were
discounted by the data, the model was refined. The application of a stochastic patient

decision process representative of crowdinforming was demonstrated to contribute to load
balancing at individual hospital emergency departments. The evidence for the findings was
the trace file data associated with real ED visits within a regional health authority, and the
balancing of arrival rates as a consequence of self redirection when a metric of ED ‘busyness’
is presented to the public. It was noted however, that although loads were being balanced
across the facilities, the simulation did not indicate any alleviation in the variance associated
with the arrival rates. In this regard, an increase in variability may detrimentally contribute to

the patient flow within the various EDs.

Future work will include the utilization of running averages of the WTBS time, LOS and
arrival rates once more data become available, as well as multiple regression analysis to learn
more about predictor variables and a dependent “busyness” variable. Preliminary analysis
indicates that several parameters and their interactions could be included in a more detailed


                                                                                             17
     Online Journal of Public Health Informatics * ISSN 1947-2579 * http://ojphi.org * Vol.3, No. 2, 2011
                 M. Friesen et al. / Load Balancing at Emergency Departments using “Crowdinforming”


estimate of “busyness”. The stochastic decision process and control model would remain the
same.



Competing interests

The authors declare that they have no competing or conflicting interests.

Acknowledgement


The authors would like to thank the P.T.H. Thorlakson Foundation for a research grant in
support of models for healthcare re-engineering. The authors would also like to thank the
reviewers for their thoughtful comments.


Correspondence

Robert McLoed
University of Manitoba
Email: mcloed@ee.umanitoba.ca


References

[1]   D.A. Thompson, P.R. Yarnold, D.R. Williams, & S.L. Adams, Effects of actual waiting
      time, perceived waiting time, information delivery, and expressive quality on patient
      satisfaction in the emergency department, Ann Emerg Med, 28, 657-665, 1996.

[2]   A. Mortimore & S. Cooper, The "4-hour target": emergency nurses' views, Emerg Med
      J, 24, 402-404, 2007.
[3]   S. Trzeciak & E.P. Rivers, Emergency department overcrowding in the United States:
      an emerging threat to patient safety and public health, Emerg Med J, 20, 402-405, 2003.
[4]   M.W. Cooke, S. Wilson, J. Halsall & A. Roalfe, Total time in English accident and
      emergency departments is related to bed occupancy, Emerg. Med. J., 21, 575-576,
      2004.

[5]   M. Lyons, R. Brown & R. Wears, Factors that affect the flow of patients through
      triage, Emerg Med J, 24, 78-85, 2007.
[6]   R. Dunn, Reduced access block causes shorter emergency department waiting times:
      An historical control observational study, Emergency Medicine, 15(3), 232-238, 2003.
[7]   R.W. Derlet & J.R. Richards, Overcrowding in the nation’s emergency departments:
      Complex causes and disturbing effects, Ann Emerg Med, 35(1), 63-68, 2000.
[8]   M.W. Cooke, S. Wilson, & S. Pearson, The effect of a separate stream for minor

      injuries on accident and emergency department waiting times, Emergency Medicine
      Journal, 19, 28-30, 2002.
[9]   T.C. Chan, J.P. Killeen, D. Kelly & D.A. Guss, Impact of Rapid Entry and Accelerated
      Care at Triage on Reducing Emergency Department Patient Wait Times, Lengths of
      Stay, and Rate of Left Without Being Seen, Ann Emerg Med, 46(6), 491-497, 2005.
[10] M.J. Schull, A. Kiss, & J.P. Szalai, The Effect of Low-Complexity Patients on
      Emergency Department Waiting Times, Ann Emerg Med, 49(3), 257-264, 2007.

[11] O. Miro, M. Sanchez, G. Espinosa, B. Coll-Vinent, E. Bragulat & J. Milla, Analysis of
      patient flow in the emergency department and the effect of an extensive reorganization,
      Emerg Med J, 20, 143-148, 2003.


                                                                                         18
     Online Journal of Public Health Informatics * ISSN 1947-2579 * http://ojphi.org * Vol.3, No. 2, 2011
                 M. Friesen et al. / Load Balancing at Emergency Departments using “Crowdinforming”


[12] F. Subash, F. Dunn, B. McNicholl & J. Marlow, Team triage improves emergency
      department efficiency, Emerg. Med. J. 21, 542-544, 2004.
[13] D.A. Thompson, P.R. Yarnold, S.L. Adams, A.B. Spacone, How accurate are waiting

      time Perceptions of patients in the emergency department?, Ann Emerg Med, 28, 652-
      656, 1996.
[14] http://www.cbc.ca/canada/manitoba/story/2010/12/07/mb-ambulances-misericordia-
      health-centre-winnipeg.html#ixzz17XH7WGjK
[15] C.E. Saunders, P.K. Makens & L.J. Leblanc, Modeling emergency department

      operations using advanced computer simulation systems, Ann Emerg Med,18(2), 134-
      140, 1989.
[16] R.A. Kilmer, A.E. Smith & L.J. Shuman, An Emergency Department Simulation and a
      Neural Network Metamodel, J Society for Health Systems, 1997.
[17] M.M. Gunal & M. Pidd, Understanding accident and emergency department
      performance using simulation, Proc of the 38 Conf on Winter Simulation, Monterey,

      CA, 2006.
[18] M. Draeger, An emergency department simulation model used to evaluate athernative
      nurse staffing and patient population scenarios, Proceedings of the 24 Conference on
      Winter Simulation, Arlington, VA, 1992.
[19] S. Takakuwa & D. Katagiri, Modeling of patient flows in a large-scale outpatient

      hospital ward by making use of electronic medical records, Proceedings of the 39th
      Conference on Winter Simulation, Washington D.C., 2007.
[20] G.R. Hung, S.R. Whitehouse, C. O’Neill, A. Gray & N. Kissoon, Computer modeling
      of patient flow in a pediatric emergency department using discrete event simulation,
      Pediatric Emergency Care, 23(1), 5-10, 2007.
[21] P.V. Asaro, L.M. Lewis & S.B. Boxerman, The Impact of Input and Output Factors on

      Emergency Department Throughput. Acad Emerg Med, 14: 235–242.
      doi: 10.1197/j.aem.2006.10.104, 2007.
[22] S.J. Weiss, R. Derlet, J. Arndahl et al., Estimating the degree of emergency department
      overcrowding in academic medical centers: results of the National ED Overcrowding
      Study (NEDOCS), Acad Emerg Med, 11, 38–50, 2004.
[23] M.L. McCarthy, D. Aronsky, G.D. Kelen, The measurement of daily surge and its

      relevance to disaster preparedness, Acad Emerg Med, 13(11), 1138-1141, 2006.
[24] T.J. Reeder, H.G. Garrison, When the safety net is unsafe:real-time assessment of the
      overcrowded emergency department, Acad Emerg Med, 8, 1070–1074, 2001.
[25] L.I. Solberg, B.R. Asplin, R.M. Weinick, D.J. Magid, Emergency department crowding:
      consensus development of potential measures, Ann Emerg Med, 42, 824–834, 2003.
[26] S.L. Bernstein, V. Verghese, W. Leung, A.T. Lunney, I. Perez, Development and validation of
      a new index to measure emergency department crowding, Acad Emerg Med, 10, 938–942,
      2003.
[27] M.L. McCarthy, S.L. Zeger, R. Ding, S.R. Levin, J.S. Desmond, J. Lee, D. Aronsky,

      Crowding delays treatment and lengthens emergency department length of stay, even
      among high-acuity patients, Ann Emerg Med., 54(4), 511-513, 2009.
[28] Song, C., Z. Qu, N. Blumm, and A-L. Barabási, Limits of Predictability in Human
      Mobility, Science, 327 (5968), 1018, 2010. [DOI: 10.1126/science.1177170]
[29] J. Howe, The Rise of Crowdsourcing, Wired, June 2006,
      http://www.wired.com/wired/archive/14.06/crowds.html. Retrieved 2010-2-18.

[30] P. Sprivulis & B. Gerrard, Internet-accessible emergency department workload
      information reduces ambulance diversion, Prehospital Emergency Care, 9(3), 285-291,
      2005.
[31] http://www.ertexting.com/



                                                                                           19
     Online Journal of Public Health Informatics * ISSN 1947-2579 * http://ojphi.org * Vol.3, No. 2, 2011
                  M. Friesen et al. / Load Balancing at Emergency Departments using “Crowdinforming”


[32] http://www.fiercehealthcare.com/story/patients-use-smartphone-apps-find-nearest-
      er/2010-11-23

[33] B. Adini, R. Cohen, D. Laor, A. Israeli, Can patient flow be effectively controlled? Health
      Policy Plan. (2011) czr002 first published online January 27, 2011 doi:10.1093/heapol/czr002
[34] M. Noeth, P. Ratn, F. Mueller, M. Schulz, B. R. de Supinski, ScalaTrace: Scalable
      compression and replay of communication traces for high-performance computing, J
      Parallel and Distributed Computing, 69(8), 696-710, August 2009,

      DOI:10.1016/j.jpdc.2008.09.001
[35] N.K. Rathlev, et al., Time Series Analysis of Variables Associated With Daily Mean
      Emergency Department Length of Stay, Ann of Emerg Med, 49(3), 265-271, March
      2007, DOI: 10.1016/j.annemergmed.2006.11.007.
[36] J.L.Wiler, et al., Optimizing Emergency Department Front End Operations, An

      Information Paper, American College of Emergency Physicians, Jan. 2008.














































                                                                                             20

     Online Journal of Public Health Informatics * ISSN 1947-2579 * http://ojphi.org * Vol.3, No. 2, 2011