                                                    PRACTICE AND PUBLIC HEALTH POLICIES


TBM




                           mHealth approaches to child obesity prevention:


                           successes, unique challenges, and next directions


                           Eleanor B Tate, MA, Donna Spruijt-Metz, PhD, MFA, Gillian O’Reilly, BS,
                           Maryalice Jordan-Marsh, PhD, MSN, FAAN, Marientina Gotsis, MFA, Mary Ann Pentz, PhD,

                           Genevieve F Dunton, PhD, MPH

Department of Preventive
Medicine, Institute for PreAbstract
Research, University of Southern                                                 Implications
California, Los Angeles, CA, USAhood obesity continues to be a signiﬁcant public Research: Researchers should conduct process
Correspondence to: E Tate  health issue. mHealth systems offer state-of-the-art  evaluation of mHealth approaches; develop more
eleanort@usc.edu           approaches to intervention design, delivery, and      nuanced measures of screen time and technology-
                           diffusion of treatment and prevention efforts. Beneﬁts
Cite this as: TBM 2013;3:406–415                                                 related activities; investigate the relationships be-
doi: 10.1007/s13142-013-022include cost effectiveness, potential for real-time dataeen sedentary behavior, screen time, and focused
                           collection, feedback capability, minimized participantattention; and partner with industry for developing
                           burden, relevance to multiple types of populations, andealthier technologies.

                           increased dissemination capability. However, these
                           advantages are coupled with unique challenges. This   Practice: Health practitioners should monitor,
                           commentary discusses challenges with using mHealth    assess, and provide feedback to child obesity
                                                                                 program designers about users' data transfer
                           strategies for child obesity prevention, such as lack issues, perceived security and privacy, sedentary
                           scientiﬁc evidence base describing effectiveness of   behavior, focused attention, and maintenance of
                           commercially available applications; relatively slowerbehavior change.

                           speed of technology development in academic research
                           settings as compared with industry; data security, andPolicy: Policy makers should support regulation
                           patient privacy; potentially adverse consequences of  of claims and quality of medical apps for
                                                                                 children, standardized data encryption, secure
                           increased sedentary screen time, and decreased        open architecture, and provide resources for
                           focused attention due to technology use. Implications research–industry partnerships that improve the
                           for researchers include development of more nuanced   look and feel of technology.

                           measures of screen time and other technology-related
                           activities, and partnering with industry for developing
                           healthier technologies. Implications for health      elevated blood pressure and lipid concentrations,
                           practitioners include monitoring, assessing, and     musculoskeletal pain, depression, anxiety, bullying,
                                                                                and later heart disease, asthma, and diabetes in
                           providing feedback to child obesity program designers
                           about users' data transfer issues, perceived security andthood [1–3]. Poor diet, lack of exercise, food
                           privacy, sedentary behavior, focused attention, and  marketing, a built environment that promotes
                                                                                sedentary forms of transport and leisure, lack of
                           maintenance of behavior change. Implications for polisleep, and television sets in children's bedrooms are
                           makers include regulation of claims and quality of apps
                           (especially those aimed at children), supporting     someofthemultiplesourcescontributingtochildren's
                                                                                obesogenic environment [4, 5]. Behavior-based inter-
                           standardized data encryption and secure open         ventions are essential for prevention and treatment
                           architecture, and resources for research–industry    [6]. Many forms of behavioral obesity interventions
                           partnerships that improvethelook and feelof technology.
                                                                                have been tested in the past such as school, commu-
                           Partnerships between academia and industry may       nity, family, and physician based, which have shown
                           promote solutions, as discussed in this commentary.  moderate success [7–9]. Electronic media offers
                                                                                opportunities to extend current approaches and to
                           KEYWORDS                                             develop new ones [8, 10].

                           Childhood, Obesity, Mobile technology, mHealth,
                           Screentime, Focused attention, Sedentary behavior

                                                                                POTENTAIL SUCCESS OF MHEALTH APPROACHES
                                                                                Electronic mobile technologies (e.g., smartphones,
                             Childhood obesity continues to be a signiﬁcant     iPod touch, tablets, wireless sensors, etc.) that can
                           public health issue, increasing children's risk for  be employed in mobile health (mHealth) surveil-

page 406 of 415                                                                                                                TBM
                                                                              PRACTICE AND PUBLIC HEALTH POLICIES




                              lance, prevention, and intervention efforts have       allow the potential for individualization on a large
                              become affordable, easy to use, and widely adopted     scale [29]. As adolescents are able to participate more
                              across socioeconomic statuses and age groups in the    in the personalization process, the intervention may
                              United States [11, 12]. mHealth-based child obesity    become more interactive; an interactive program

                              interventions can capitalize on ﬂexibility, speed, and design has been associated with increased physical
                              lower participant burden offered by mobile technol-    activity [30]. Fifth, users can easily obtain and track
                              ogy. mHealth tools have been successfully used as      self-relevant information allowing them to self-moni-
                              data collection devices, assessment tools, platforms   tor. Easily accessible reports about progress toward

                              for delivering interventions, devices for self-moni-   weight loss goals, fruit and vegetable intake, or
                              toring of behavior, and real-time surveillance tech-   physical activity may provide users with the agency
                              niques (see [11, 13–21]). Currently, a third of        needed to begin or maintain healthy behavior change.
                              American cell phone users have used the phone to       Sixth, on-body sensing technologies paired with

                              access health information, and 12 % of smartphone      mHealth systems can collect real- or near-time
                              users have at least one health app [18].               weight-related behavior data, providing users with
                                                                                     more detailed goal-relevant information and re-
                                                                                     searchers withobjective assessmentabout participants'

                              ADVANTAGES OF MHEALTH FOR BEHAVIORAL                   actions and contexts. Seventh, mHealth tools provide
                              INTERVENTIONS                                          a platform for adaptive interventions [31]. Digital
                                                                                     technology programs could use decision rules to
                              mHealth offers some advantages over traditional        deliver program components automatically, providing
                              face-to-face methods for delivering behavioral inter-
                              ventions. These include cost-effective dissemination,  aspeci ﬁed dose depending upon participant actions
                              real-time data collection and feedback, lowered        [26]. Tailoring variables can be measured via mHealth
                                                                                     tools and used to assign an optimum dosage of
                              participant burden, ﬂexible program tailoring, data    program components [26, 31] to participants in real-
                              for self-monitoring, on-body sensing devices for
                              weight-related behavior information, a platform for    or near-time. Possibly, adaptations could be made and
                              adaptive interventions, and visually appealing, en-    delivered repeatedly as the need arose within a study
                                                                                     [26, 31]. Behavioral researchers may develop adaptive
                              gaging multimedia modalities. First, mobile devices    treatmentdesigns[31]thataccommodatenewindustry
                              are widely used across age groups and populations,
                              providing a cost-effective platform for health pro-    products [32]. Eighth, mHealth technologies could
                              gram implementation. This popular platform can be      display visually appealing screens and present excit-
                                                                                     ing, engaging, novel, entertaining games that make
                              used to provide a large audience of children and       participation enjoyable [19, 33]. Web-based weight
                              adolescents with best practice approaches to treat-
                              ment and prevention of obesity, such as increasing     loss applications that provide visual feedback to users
                              physical activity and decreasing sedentary behavior    may improve success [34]. This beneﬁt may increase
                                                                                     compliance, maximizing the dosage that participants
                              [9, 22, 23]. Second, behavioral data can be collected
                              in real or near time, allowing feedback to be          receive. Ninth, process evaluation information, both
                              automatically delivered rapidly following a person's   on program delivery and usage [35],canbecollected
                              action (such as a bout of exercise). The small time    inrealornear-real time.Thesedatamayprovidemore
                                                                                     precise estimates of dose information than previously
                              interval between desired behavior and feedback
                              may increase the likelihood that the action will be    possible, potentially revealing new relationships be-
                              repeated [24]. Third, the time required for partici-   tween program components and health outcomes.
                              pation in research and interventions is decreased.     Tenth, mHealth approaches can leverage participants'
                                                                                     extant social networks or create new social support
                              Intervention components and survey requests can
                              be delivered directly to a participant, a phenomenon   networks to encourage behavior change. A recent
                              known as “zero-geography” (see [25]), without travel   review found that using social support networks was
                              for face-to-face interviews or being tethered to       oneofﬁvestrategiesusedinthedesignspaceofmobile
                                                                                     phone health interventions [ 12] as follows: “(1)
                              home-based telephone lines. Lower participant
                              burden may translate to lower study attrition and      tracking health information, (2) involving the
                              increased participant motivation. Fourth, technolo-    healthcare team, (3) leveraging social inﬂuence, (4)
                              gy-based programs can be tailored and personalized.    increasing accessibility of health information, and (5)
                                                                                     utilizing entertainment” (p. 186).
                              Software applications (“apps”), interfaces, and de-
                              vices (such as mobile phones) can be personalized.
                              Beyond large fonts for the visually impaired or
                                                                                     CHALLENGES IN MHEALTH
                              automatic language translation, avatars could be
                              tailored by gender or culture for participants’ apps.  mHealth interventions offer opportunities for new
                              Tailoring may increase effectiveness of a health       types of research, implementation, and program
                              behavior intervention [26, 27]. Qualitative research   diffusion. However, there are signiﬁcant challenges

                              suggests that obese adolescents are enthusiastic about associated with using mHealth strategies in child
                              receiving tailored text messages during a weight       obesity treatment and prevention. These include
                              management program, particularly messages that are     slowerspeed of scientiﬁc development andimplemen-
                              positive, direct, and encouraging [28]. mHealth tools  tation compared to the mobile technology industry,
TBM                                                                                                                            page 407 of 415
  PRACTICE AND PUBLIC HEALTH POLICIES




                               difﬁculties of conducting transdisciplinary science, databetween systems) and minimize research participant
                               transfer issues, security and privacy issues, barriers torisk [40].
                               long-term maintenance, and development and imple-          Researchers at nonproﬁt institutions, such as uni-
                               mentation with children and families. These specﬁic      versities, and developers in commercial organizations

                               challenges are described be  low. Policy and practice    are the likely creators of software and apps. However,
                               implications of these challenges are addressed in        these two groups do not always aim to create
                               “CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS                    ”.   interoperable platforms, and commercial entities may
                                                                                        believe that doing so would decrease competitive

                                                                                        advantage [40]. Researchers at universities are regu-
                               The speed of research versus industry                    lated byinstitutionalreviewboards(IRB),whichcould
                                                                                        require standardized data security policies. Organiza-
                               Progression from scientiﬁc research, clinical devel-     tions such as the American Telemedicine Association
                               opment, and translation to clinical practice may be
                               slow and less systematic than is ideal [36]. Yet, rapid  already provide administrative, clinical, and technical
                                                                                        guidelines for telemental health [41]. Commercial
                               rise and widespread use of mobile technologies [11,      designers may not be subject to oversight resembling
                               18, 37] suggest that demand for new wireless connec-     IRB committees, although they may attempt to self-
                               tivity devices (hardware) and applications (software)
                               will push industry to develop newer products at even     regulate. The US Food and Drug Administration
                                                                                        (FDA) plans to regulate medical mobile apps as well
                               faster rates. As the speed of industry development       [42]. The advantages and disadvantages of this planned
                               increases, the window of time within which mHealth-      regulation have been discussed.
                               based interventions can be developed, pilot-tested,
                               and empirically validated will narrow. By the time that

                               the research process is ready to support dissemination   Data transfer issues
                               of the intervention to larger populations, the technol-  Erroneous or mistimed feedback could be delivered to
                               ogy tested may have become obsolete. The mobile          participantsifdataorservertransferissuesoccur,devices
                               technology industry aims to create sleek devices and
                                                                                        havelowbatterypower,orothertechnicaldﬁic     fultiesare
                               attractive software that persuade potential consumers    encountered [25]. These issues could lead participants to
                               and meet expectations of current customers. Conse-       disengage with the interven tion or become frustrated,
                               quently, the look and feel of industry products is       weakening program eﬁ   fcacy. These topics are current
                               professional, and the technology is regularly updated.
                                                                                        concerns in theﬁeld; recently, the 4th Annual mHealth
                               However, industry products are not routinely tested      Summit, sponsored, in part, by the National Institutes of
                               for accuracy, reliability, validity, or use in clinical oHealth, facilitated conversation about how to address
                               preventive settings. In contrast, health researchers     them [43]. Downed servers could potentially cause
                               develop empirically validated programs, but the
                                                                                        intervention components to fail to be delivered or cause
                               mHealthtechnologyusedisoftenoutdatedandcannot            delays in reporting such that feedback to participants
                               compete with newer industry products. The possible       was no longer relevant (e.g., a text message that suggests
                               outdated look and feel of products made for health       a user has been inactive when, indeed, she has just
                               research may be especially poor at capturing and
                                                                                        returned from a run). Because participants in mHealth
                               holding the interest of children, who are used to        studies are unsupervised during data collection, the
                               appealing commercial devices, technology, and soft-      potential exists for people other than those actually
                               ware.                                                    enrolled in the study to complete survey data or provide

                                                                                        biometricinput.Underthisscenario,evenwhendataare
                                                                                        transferred successfully, they will be erroneously attrib-
                               Data security and participant privacy                    uted to the research participant. Missing data resulting
                               Privacy and data security are key issues for the         from technological glitches could also cause d ﬁfulties
                               mHealth community [38]. Global positioning system
                               (GPS) data, medical records, and other mHealth           for data analysis. However, mHealth approaches may
                                                                                        result in less missing data overall than traditional pre-
                               informationmust be secured to protect patient privacy    postmeasures. Data analytic techniques for missing data
                               [38, 39] and to earn participants' trust. Wireless       [44] and for this type of multilevel data are avaie5[].
                               technology may increase the risk of unauthorized
                               access by third parties; hence, standardized multime-

                               dia encryption (to ensure that video or audio ﬁles       Challenges of transdisciplinary science
                               could also be securely transferred) prior to data        Development of mobile technologies for behavioral
                               transmission would help protect users [40]. Compa-       interventions requires collaboration of teams com-

                               nies that manufacture apps tend to collect names,        posed of experts from many different ﬁelds [25, 46].
                               email addresses, and other personal identiﬁers when      These ﬁelds often have different scientiﬁcp rese
                               apps are downloaded, and this practice potentially       and different ﬁeld-speciﬁc “languages.” Interdisciplin-
                               increases risk for breaches of conﬁdentiality [40]. Data ary teams have the additional challenge of learning to

                               security policies could be standardized by meeting       create new scientiﬁc processes that incorporate the
                               speciﬁcations for encryption and secure communica-       processes and languages of different ﬁelds to solve
                               tion [40]. Standardized data security policies would     novel problems. The development of team science
                               help create interoperability (i.e., functional exchange  approaches to using mHealth technologies may also
page 408 of 415                                                                                                                            TBM
                                                                                PRACTICE AND PUBLIC HEALTH POLICIES




                              help expedite the development of a common lan-           mHealth context. Consequently, when the devices are
                              guage, timeline, and research priorities among re-       no longer available (e.g., people return them at the
                              searchers from different ﬁelds [46]. Practices and       conclusion of a study or technology malfunctions on a
                              support from industry may help to guide the develop-     personal phone are too costly to ﬁx), people can no

                              ment of collaboration standards for researchers across   longer engage in the same behaviors (e.g., using a
                              disciplines. However, guidelines for success in testing  smartphone to self-monitor weight). mHealth pro-
                              and dissemination may differ between stakeholders,       grams that teach participants long-term strategies that
                              and adding industry partnerships to the inherently       they can implement either on their own devices, on

                              transdisciplinary mHealth approach must be               devices they receive after participation, or on devices
                              conducted carefully.                                     theyareabletopurchaseusingcompensationfromthe
                                                                                       study may better equip them for long-term mainte-
                                                                                       nance. Alternatively, mHealth programs could use

                              Maintenance of behavior change                           stepped designs in which participants ﬁrst rely on the
                              One long-recognized challenge of weight loss inter-      device for behavior change but gradually transition to
                                                                                       cues in their own environment for maintenance.
                              ventions is sustaining loss after an intervention has    Although important to consider, these issues may
                              ended [47–49]. A meta-analysis of structured weight
                              loss programs in adults found that weight loss           become less problematic as devices and service plans
                              maintained long term was ≈ 3.0 kg after 5 years [47].    become less expensive, and validated apps could be
                                                                                       covered by healthcare or employee incentive plans.
                              However, people in the general population do lose
                              weight and maintain signiﬁcant loses using strategies
                              such as regular physical activity, low-calorie/low-fat
                              diets, and regular self-monitoring of weight [49].       Development and implementation with children

                              Family support is important for children's mainte-       and families
                              nance of healthy changes inobesitytreatment [22],but     Children's short- and long-term successes following
                              programs that include a family-based component may       weight loss and management programs are beneﬁtted
                              be more challenging to implement over long periods       by family and parent involvement [23, 52–55]. Yet,

                              oftime. Part of the difﬁculty maintainingweight after a  parents face barriers in completing long-term program
                              program may be that weight loss interventions have       requirements [56]. Group treatment designs may be a
                              often treated a “chronic problem with brief programs”    more cost-effective way to deliver family interventions
                              ([48] p. 369), although newer interventions extend this  thangroupplusindividual-basedformats[57].Schools

                              timeline [49]. A beneﬁt of mHealth technology is that    are a recommended venue for obesity prevention
                              people can use their own devices to run weight main-     programs [23], but school restrictions on child mobile
                              tenance apps long after participating in a study. This   phone use in school settings limit intervention deliv-
                              opportunity signi ﬁcantly extends the reach of           ery. However, restrictions may be lifted as mobile

                              mHealth interventions beyond what is possible with       technology increasingly becomes incorporated into
                              personnel-heavy approaches. A second beneﬁtisthat        educational curricula [58]. Children, as minors, are
                              mHealth tools have the capacity to collect data          more vulnerable than adults and may have different
                              frequently, unobtrusively, and in interactive ways that  privacy concerns. Parental acts of digital child super-

                              can boost self-monitoring adherence in weight loss       vision (such as text messaging to request the child's
                              programs [50]. Early studies into weight loss interven-  location) may interfere with children's desire for
                              tion were not able to record long-term progress as       autonomy [25]. Parents and siblings could share usage
                              frequently and measurements may have been taken          of the same device,or friendsmay grab devices during

                              annually, providing very limited information about       play. When children provide information as part of a
                              progress (or regress) within the year [48]. More recent  research study, data is protected by IRB-approved
                              designs have measured progress as frequently as once     procedures. Yet, children may have a more difﬁcult
                              per week during early phases [51]. Yet, mHealth          time fully understanding risks and providing informed

                              capabilities for data collection multiply the frequency  assent; care should be taken when parental permission
                              and depth of information that can be measured about      and child assent are not in agreement [59]. Further,
                              processes and outcomes of weight maintenance.            outside the protection of researcher conﬁdentiality,
                                 One potential long-term drawback, however, of         health and medical apps do not necessarily promise to

                              mHealth-based weight loss interventions may be           protect user's data as strictly. Children's activities may
                              device dependency. Long-term weight maintenance          be more difﬁcult to track than adults'. Whereas adults
                              relies on continuing to implement lifestyle changes      often carry their cell phone in a pocket or purse,

                              [49]. Certain mHealth intervention designs that are      children may not regularly carry the devices. This
                              effective in the short-term for weight reduction could   could make it difﬁcult, for example, for researchers
                              potentially impair participants' ability to implement    using data from global positioning systems (GPS) to
                              long-term weight maintenance behaviors. Speciﬁcally,     gain adequate information to draw conclusions about

                              interventions that teach participants to rely solely on  parent–child dyad activity. Mobile devices that chil-
                              the device to cue action, provide information, and       dren can wear, such as on arm bands, may improve
                              otherwise enable lifestyle change behaviors may not      tracking results. Some research suggests that parent-
                              be teaching skills that are transferable outside of the  only interventions are effective for long-term treat-
TBM                                                                                                                              page 409 of 415
  PRACTICE AND PUBLIC HEALTH POLICIES




                              ment of child obesity [53], raising the question of     been associated with high BMI and adiposity in
                              whom to target for the best results. In addition,       children [66, 67]. Results of a randomized controlled
                              because mHealth interventions are mobile, children      trial show that decreasing television viewing and
                              are likely to be in a varying array of contexts—school, computerscreen time using a device to regulate screen

                              home, family, or friend—when prompted. This in-         use was associated with lower BMI z-score for children
                              creased variety in context may alter the efﬁcacy of an  who had a BMI ≥75th percentile, mediated by
                              mHealth program in ways not seen with paper-and-        changes in sedentary behavior [68]. Screen time
                              pencil or desktop-based avenues of program delivery.    sedentary behavior, such as television or video game

                              The places in which technology is used affect how       use, has not been consistently associated with higher
                              devices are used and what they mean to users, a         BMI, although many studies do ﬁnd a signiﬁcant
                              conceptknownas“technogeography”[25,60].Finally,         relationship [65]. High levels of interactive media use
                              gaining and retaining children's attention may require  (such as internet surﬁng and video games) have been

                              more engaging games or apps than needed for adults.     speciﬁcally associated with BMI and body fat percent-
                              Developmentally appropriate technologies will need      age in adolescent girls above and beyond the seden-
                              to be used, but mHealth approaches offer great          tary behaviors of television viewing, talking on the
                              opportunity for offering novelty and excitement.        phone, and reading/homework [69]. The effect of

                                                                                      screen time on adiposity may be moderated by the
                                                                                      content of the media [65]. The variety of devices used,
                              POTENTIAL SUCCESSES OF MHEALTH FOR OBESITY              media multitasking, may affect adiposity as well [70].
                              PREVENTION                                              Much research on screen time has been conducted on

                              mHealth approaches have shown success for diet and      stationary devices such as televisions and desktop
                              physical activity interventions in adults and children  computers. As game use, media viewing, and other
                              [19, 33, 63, 64]. Obesity treatment and prevention      screen time become more mobile, research on the
                                                                                      association between screen time and obesity risk will
                              studies that use mobile-based, interactive technology
                              and text messages may be preferred by adolescents       need to be updated. Potentially, the association could
                              over traditional paper-and-pencil approaches1[9, 33].   weaken if screen time becomes less sedentary as
                              mHealth types of technologies show promise for aiding   technology becomes increasingly mobile. Mobility of
                                                                                      tablets and smartphones allows people to exercise
                              self-monitoring adherence for diet and physical activity
                              [19, 50]. Populations at highest risk for obesity may bewhile using media, potentially weakening the link.
                              more easily reached by mHealth approaches. In 2011,     Healthier mobile technologies might ameliorate unfa-
                              Black and Hispanic (English- and non-English-speak-     vorable effects of screen time on obesity risk. For
                                                                                      example, apps could prompt users to move after
                              ing) adults were just as likely as Whites to go online
                              wirelessly [61]. Further, Blacks and Hispanics were     prolonged periods of sedentary behavior, encouraging
                              morelikelythanWhitestouseacellphonetoaccessthe          “sedentary breaks” [71]. Also, very little exploration
                              internet, send and receive email, and download an app   has gone into development of pervasive games,

                              [61]. Although a digital divide still sthose with the   outdoor augmented reality, and mobile games that
                              lowest education level and income are least likely to   could encourage connection with nature and social
                              own a smartphone—fully half (50 %) of people making     interaction [72, 73]. Parents, peers, teachers, and other
                              <$30,000 per year and 53 % of those with only a high    social inﬂuences on child sedentary behavior and

                              school education go online wirelessly 6[1]. Obesity     media use will be important to consider in studies and
                              prevention programs could be delivered to those at the  interventions aswell. Ourmain challenge asaﬁeldis to
                              highest risk using mobile technology6[2].               break the connection between screen time and in-
                                                                                      creased sedentary behavior. As children spend larger

                                                                                      portions of leisure and entertainment time using a
                              CHALLENGES WITH MHEALTH SPECIFIC TO OBESITY             device with a screen, they will be healthier to the extent
                              PREVENTION                                              that they can be less sedentary. Research is urgently
                                                                                      needed to understand which factors (e.g., environmen-
                              Although mHealth approaches show promise for the
                              child obesity prevention ﬁeld, researchers using these  tal, inter- and intrapersonal, technological, media
                              strategies face unique challenges. The following two    content, developmental, and social) inﬂuence the
                              possible, if unintended, consequences of screen time    relationships between sedentary behavior, screen time,
                                                                                      and obesity risk. Further, we must understand whether
                              connectedwithmHealthcouldadverselyaffectobesity
                              risk: increased sedentary behavior and decreased        and how these factors can be modﬁ  i ed. In whatever
                              ability to focus attention.                             way the technology provides it, a crucial element for
                                                                                      improving the use of mHealth for future child obesity
                                                                                      prevention requires undersatnding and altering of the

                              Sedentary behavior and screen time                      screen time/sedentary behavior connection.
                              Both television use and snacking while watching

                              television have been associated with increased seden-
                              tary behavior, but effects may be speciﬁctothetypeof    Decreased ability to focus attention
                              media, its content, or the context of delivery [15, 65].Television and video game exposure have been
                              Greater television viewing and other screen time has    associated with higher risk for attention problems in
page 410 of 415                                                                                                                        TBM
                                                                            PRACTICE AND PUBLIC HEALTH POLICIES




                             both cross-sectional and longitudinal studies [74,    obesity risk. Games that mimic real-life time
                             75]. Multiple causes likely contribute, but at least twoquences, instead of fast cuts, may not have the
                             hypotheseshave beenadvanced. First, the association   same effects on focused attention, suggesting alter-
                             may be due to adverse brain development from          native media designs would be helpful, or if the

                             large amounts of fast-paced, attention-grabbing       effects are the same or the media is less appealing,
                             media content [75]. Second, children may become       perhaps improved executive function, visuospatial
                             accustomed to rapid scene changes and ﬁnd more        attention, or mental rotation capabilities could be
                             slow-paced tasks, such as homework, boring [75].      harnessed to offset the shift away from focused
                                                                                   attention. For example, brain training for increased
                             Attention regulation difﬁculty, as a subcomponent
                             of both attention deﬁcit disorder and impulsivity,    executive function may allow a child to use higher
                             has been associated with overweight and obesity       order self-regulation strategies to inhibit junk food
                             [76, 77]. More research is needed to understand       consumption, thereby compensating for any effects
                                                                                   on decreased focused attention. In sum, research
                             potential causal relationships, but an inability to   investigating the underlying processes and inﬂuen-
                             regulate attention may hamper inhibition of impul-
                             sive snacking episodes or interruption of long        tial factors on media use, focused attention, and
                             stretches of sedentary behavior. Media that is        obesity risk is critical.

                             widely, instantly available, even if it contains
                             messages about healthy behaviors, may need to
                             be assessed for potential adverse effects on attentionCONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
                             with respect to obesity risk. Importantly, the
                                                                                   mHealth systems offer opportunities for surveillance
                             relationship between media, video games, cogni-       and research in childhood obesity as well as
                             tion, and brain function is complex [78]. Video       development, delivery, and dissemination of treat-
                             game use may beneﬁcially affect visuospatial atten-
                             tion and mental rotation capabilities [ 78–80].       ment and prevention programs. The challenges of
                                                                                   mHealth implementation include the relatively
                             Exergames [81, 82] and brain training games may       slower speed of scientiﬁc research versus the mobile
                             improve executive function [83]. The implications     technology industry, data security and participant
                             of “brain training” effects on the immature brain
                             are not completely understood [84]. In brief, age     privacy, data transfer issues, challenges of transdis-
                                                                                   ciplinary science, maintenance of behavior change,
                             differences could be magniﬁed due to a lack of        and working with children and families. Although
                             prior brain structures, increasing specialization may these issues confront the ﬁeld, the advantages of
                             sacriﬁce plasticity and creativity, and the degree to
                             which plasticity is possible depends on genetic and   mHealth tools are many. Flexibility, minimization of
                                                                                   reporting bias, and entertainment value provide a
                             epigenetic factors [84]. Brain development occurs     compelling case for its continued uptake by health
                             through positive social interaction and supportive    behavior interventionists. For child obesity re-
                             social relationships; social neglect may lead to
                                                                                   searchers, mHealth tools provide an attractive
                             lifelong vulnerabilities in psychological functioning platform from which to engage children and adoles-
                             [85]. Children who interact with technology to the    cents in monitoring healthy nutrition and physical
                             exclusion of spending time with other people may      activity, playing exergames, and developing cogni-
                             adversely affect healthy development. Designing
                                                                                   tive capabilities. However, child obesity interven-
                             prosocial interventions or electronic games is        tions that harness the power of mHealth may need
                             important, followed by modeling prosocial behavior    to be designed and implemented in ways that direct
                             in the interactions required between users/players    sedentary screen time and focused attention in
                             of health games. The most negative aspect
                                                                                   healthy, productive ways. Socioecological, clinical,
                             of traditional video games has to do with slot        and program evaluation of mHealth approaches will
                             machine reward mechanisms. At a young age,            be necessary for ensuring efﬁcacy (i.e., beneﬁcial
                             overstimulating the hippocampus has implications      effects on health outcomes under controlled condi-
                             for long-term aging problems [86]. Technologies
                                                                                   tions) and effectiveness (i.e., beneﬁcial effects in real-
                             that improve attention and self-regulation capabili-  world settings) [87]. Two differences between the
                             ties have the potential to strengthen children's      goals of efﬁcacy and effectiveness approaches plague
                             ability to manage diet and physical activity behav-   successful translation from the prior to the latter
                             iors. Partnerships between child obesity researchers
                                                                                   [87]. First, efﬁcacy trials are often conducted in
                             and the mHealth industry could help shape tech-       controlled settings on select populations of motivat-
                             nology development in the direction of creating       ed individuals who do not have comorbidities,
                             healthier technologies. The critical challenge is
                                                                                   whereas effectiveness trials must demonstrate results
                             twofold. First, we must understand the relationships  across demographic, motivational, and diagnosis
                             between media use, decreased ability to focus         boundaries [ 87]. Second, ef ﬁcacy trials are
                             attention, and obesity risk. Research is needed that  conducted in speciﬁc settings, and the context of
                             identiﬁes causal sequences, intervening mechanisms,
                                                                                   delivery is typically narrow to provide a more
                             and the degree to which these are modiﬁable.          precise test of the program components. Yet,
                             Second, we must leverage this understanding to        effectiveness trials must deliver programs across a
                             develop strategies for confronting the associated     wide distribution of settings and multiple, possibly
TBM                                                                                                                         page 411 of 415
  PRACTICE AND PUBLIC HEALTH POLICIES




                             dynamic, contexts [87]. Most importantly, it should   must be updated to meet users' expectations about
                             be noted that new research methodologies, appro-      the look and feel of the technology. Signiﬁcant
                             priate for the fast evaluation of mHealth interven-   opportunity exists for developers and researchers
                             tions, must be employed to fully capitalize on the    to reach beyond “gamiﬁcation” [96, 97] and to

                             advantages offered by mobile technologies, real-      design mHealth experiences and entertainment that
                             time monitoring, and the rapid advancement of         go beyond implementation of random reinforce-
                             technologies that can change during the develop-      ment schedules to create experiences that can truly
                             ment of an intervention [88]. The prevalence and      support and monitor optimal developmental mile-

                             popularity of mHealth delivery systems provide a      stones. To promote healthy eating and activity, new
                             platform that is user-friendly across participant and games and apps could be designed that encourage
                             setting characteristics, allowing researchers to ad-  physical activity or discourage sedentary behavior
                             dress these issues, hopefully increasing the likeli-  by prompting people to take “sedentary breaks”

                             hood that program delivery will result in real-world  during extended periods of inactivity [71]. Applica-
                             behavior change. Evaluation methods will need to      tions could be developed to help people who have
                             be developed (e.g., [89]) and reporting standardized  lost weight anticipate and self-monitor new chal-
                             (e.g., [87, 90]). Health behavior theories provide    lenges that may arise such as an increased appetite

                             frameworks for evaluation [ 91] and can guide         or decreased energy expenditure [98]. Child obesity
                             evaluation of mHealth approaches. To use social       interventions that capitalize on the strengths of
                             cognitive theory [92] as an example, mobile delivery  mHealth tools are being developed, but additional
                             of avatars behaving in healthy ways would provide     research is needed.

                             models and opportunities for observational learning.
                             Frequent, real-time feedback provides incentives
                             that may change relationships between participant     Practice recommendations
                             self-efﬁcacy and health outcomes. As another          The prevalence, ease of use, and ﬂexibility of
                                                                                   mobile technology create a strong foundation for
                             example, self-determination theory [ 93]hlstat
                             people are intrinsically motivated to seek chal-      cost-effective dissemination and distribution. Health
                             lenging, novel experiences; fun mHealth games         professionals who use mHealth tools to implement
                             and apps may be able to provide new ways to           child obesity programs may wish to monitor users'
                                                                                   sedentary behavior, screen time, and focused atten-
                             promote intrinsic motivation.
                                                                                   tion. Guidelines for “behavioral equivalence” may
                                                                                   be useful in order to understand how to implement
                                                                                   and regulate a “healthy dosage” of technology, such
                             Research recommendations                              as screen time that could substitute or enhance
                             Designers of new child obesity treatment and
                             prevention techniques, technologies, and programs     meaningful learning, social interaction, physical
                                                                                   activity, or interaction with nature. Other issues
                             will need to devise nuanced measures of screen        such as increased social isolation, addiction to
                             time. Measures will need to assess media content,     gaming, or electromagnet ic radiation exposure
                             type of media, how media is used, multitasking
                             while using media, social context, parent–child and   with high cell phone use could be monitored as
                                                                                   well [15, 65–69, 99–101]. mHealth tools and
                             peer–peer shared engagement, frequency, opportu-      interventions continue to be developed and
                             nity costs (e.g., other activities that children are nfeedback from practitioners will be necessary to
                             pursuing because of taking advantage of mobile
                             technology), and perceived quality of experience,     track and report practical challenges. Feedback
                                                                                   from program implementers about program
                             among other potential aspects. Media content that     reach, adoption, implementation, and mainte-
                             contains food marketing messages may change           nance will be required for ensuring real-world
                             children's food preferences [94]. Media multitasking
                             (using multiple media sources at one time) may        effectiveness [87, 102]. Health practitioners will
                                                                                   be essential in reporting accurately about user
                             rapidly multiply exposure [70]. However, parent       experiences with data transfer issues, perceptions
                             engagement and coplaying of video games may           of security and privacy, and maintenance of
                             increase connectivity within families [95], which
                             could beneﬁt parental inﬂuence on children's health   behavior change.

                             behaviors. More nuanced measures of screen time
                             will need to be developed for proper assessment of    Policy recommendations
                             these contingencies and for assessment of social      The pending US Food and Drug Administration

                             context (e.g., parents, peers, and teachers). These   guidelines propose to regulate medical mobile apps
                             nuanced measures will have to focus on behaviors      [42]. However, they do not speciﬁcally mention
                             ﬁrst instead of technologies because people use       apps directed toward children, treating this vulner-
                             technology differently [60]. For example, ownership   able population as though they have autonomy and

                             of a device does not imply or explain actual usage    cognitive development equal to adults. In addition,
                             patterns or speciﬁc behaviors. Partnerships between   the guidelines are focused on medical mobile apps
                             researchers and the mobile technology industry may    that are treatment oriented rather than prevention
                             help conduct studies quickly when devices and apps    focused. The beneﬁt of this regulation is to protect
page 412 of 415                                                                                                                    TBM
                                                                                         PRACTICE AND PUBLIC HEALTH POLICIES






                                  those who could be harmed by apps. The drawback                available and opens the possibilities for different
                                  is that innovation may be limited during this                  innovations than were possible before.

                                  relatively early period of development for the ﬁeld,
                                  potentially preventing higher quality apps in the              Acknowledgements:This work was supported by the National Institutes

                                  future. One possible solution for the interim is to            of Health Cancer Control and Epidemiology Research Training Grant 5 T32
                                  crowdsource ratings for apps [ 103]. Although                  CA 009492. The authors would like to thank two anonymous reviewers
                                                                                                 for their constructive feedback.
                                  crowdsourced ratings would not be empirically
                                  validated, and limited evidence suggests that they

                                  do not yet provide the same results as controlled
                                  trials, standardization of patient input, response               1. Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Curtin LR, Lamb MM, Flegal KM.

                                  options, and other improvements may improve the                     Prevalence of high body mass index in US children and
                                  value of crowdsourced ratings for consumers [103].                  adolescents, 2007–2008. JAMA. 2010;303(3): 242-249.
                                                                                                   2. Bell LM, Curran JA, Byrne S, et al. High incidence of obesity co-
                                  Examples of companies attempting to address this                    morbidities in young children : a cross-sectional studJ.
                                                                                                      Paediatr Child Health. 2011;47(12): 911-917.
                                  issue include the Medical App Journal ( http://                  3. Obesity WHTFoC. Solving the Problem of Childhood Obesity Within
                                  medicalappjournal.com          ), Happtique ( http://               a Generation . May 2010;    http://www.letsmove.gov/
                                                                                                      sites/letsmove.gov/   ﬁles/TaskForce_on_Childhood_
                                  www.happtique.com), and iMedicalApps (http://                       Obesity_May2010_FullReport.pdf.
                                  www.imedicalapps.com). A longer term solution,                   4. Spruijt-Metz D. Etiology, treatment, and prevention of obesity in
                                                                                                      childhood and adolescence: a decade in review. J Res Adolesc.
                                  however, may entail regulating the claims and
                                  quality of mHealth apps, especially those directed                  2011;21(1): 129-152.
                                                                                                   5. Must A, Parisi SM. Sedentary behavior and sleep: paradoxical
                                  at vulnerable populations, such as children. The                    effects in association with childhood obesity. Int J Obes.
                                  structure of such protections might follow the                      2009;33: S82-S86.
                                                                                                   6. Fisher EB, Fitzgibbon ML, Glasgow RE, et al. Behavior matters.
                                  example of Federal Communication Commission                         Am J Prev Med. 2011;40(5): E15-E30.
                                  (FCC) restrictions on violent or explicit content to             7. Waters E, de Silva-Sanigorski A, Hall BJ, et al. Interventions for
                                                                                                      preventing obesity in children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
                                  children (www.fcc.gov) or non-US policies regulat-                  2011; (12).
                                                                                                   8. Summerbell CD, Waters E, Edmunds LD, Kelly S, Brown T,
                                  ing food marketing to children [ 104]. (For an                      Campbell KJ. Interventions for preventing obesity in children.
                                  interesting history of the struggle for governmental
                                                                                                      Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2005; (3).
                                  regulation of food marketing to children in the US,              9. Flynn MAT, McNeil DA, Maloff B, et al. Reducing obesity and
                                  see [105]). Policies that support standardized data                 related chronic disease risk in children and youth: a synthesis
                                                                                                      of evidence with ‘best practice’ recommendations. Obes Rev.
                                  security procedures and interoperability, such as                   2006;7: 7-66.
                                  data encryption or open architecture, would allow               10. Nguyen B, Kornman KP, Baur LA. A review of electronic
                                                                                                      interventions for prevention and treatment of overweight and
                                  sharing across platforms, support innovation, and                   obesity in young people. Obes Rev. 2011;12(501): e298-e314.
                                  may protect users [40, 106]. Policies could regulate            11. Amanda Lenhart KP, Aaron Smith, Kathryn Zickuhr. Social
                                                                                                      Media and Young Adults. Pew Research Center. Feb 3, 2010.
                                  advertisement of mobile technologies. Similar to the            12. Klasnja P, Pratt W. Healthcare in the pocket: mapping the space
                                  “Drink Responsibly” advertisements by liquor com-
                                                                                                      of mobile-phone health interventions. JdfI            .
                                  panies, technology businesses could advertise the                   2012;45(1): 184-198. doi:10.1016/j.jbi.2011.08.017.
                                  responsible self-regulation of sedentary behavior               13. Krishna S, Boren SA, Balas EA. Healthcare via cell phones: a
                                                                                                      systematic review. Telemed J E-Health. 2009;15(3): 231-240.
                                  associated with screen time. Policies that support              14. Riley WT, Rivera DE, Atienza AA, Nilsen W, Allison SM,
                                                                                                      Mermelstein R. Health behavior models in the age of mobile
                                  special rapid funding mechanisms for mHealth                        interventions: are our theories up to the task? Transl Behav
                                  technology-based research may improve rates of                      Med. 2011;1.
                                                                                                  15. Tate DF. Application of innovative technologies in the preven-
                                  participant compliance and decrease attrition if                    tion and treatment of overweight in children and adolescents.
                                  adolescents' expectations about the look and feel of                In: Jelalian E, Steele R, eds. Handbook of Childhood and

                                  technology can be met with updated devices and                      Adolescent Obesity. New York: Springer; 2008: 378-404.
                                  apps. Policies could support the development of                 16. Gance-Cleveland B, Gilbert LH, Kopanos T, Gilbert KC.
                                                                                                      Evaluation of technology to identify and assess overweight
                                  secure, open architecture technology and provide                    children and adolescents.   J Specialists Pediatr Nurs.
                                  resources for including updated technologies in                     2010;15(1): 72-83.
                                                                                                  17. Dunton GF, Atienza AA. The Need for time-intensive information
                                  treatment and prevention trials.                                    in healthful eating and physical activity research: a timely
                                    mHealth systems can play a signiﬁcant role in                     topic. J Am Diet Assoc. 2009;109(1): 30-35.
                                                                                                  18. Fox S, Duggan M. Mobile health 2012. Pew Internet & American
                                  diffusing child obesity treatment and prevention                    Life Project. Retrieved on: Nov 8, 2012.
                                  programs to wide audiences of users across socio-               19. Shapiro JR, Bauer S, Hamer RM, Kordy H, Ward D, Bulik CM. Use

                                  economic and age groups. The challenges facing use                  of text messaging for monitoring sugar-sweetened beverages,
                                                                                                      physical activity, and screen time in children: a pilot study. J
                                  and diffusion may require cooperation across disci-                 Nutr Educ Behav. 2008;40(6): 385-391.
                                  plines, development of new assessment methods,                  20. Khaylis A, Yiaslas T, Bergstrom J, Gore-Felton C. A review of
                                                                                                      efﬁcacious technology-based weight-loss interventions: ﬁve
                                  and close monitoring of weight-related factors such                 key components. Telemed J E-Health. 2010;16(9): 931-938.
                                  as screen time sedentary behavior and focused                   21. Burke LE, Styn MA, Sereika SM, et al. Using mHealth
                                                                                                      technology to enhance self-monitoring for weight loss: a
                                  attention. Importantly, mHealth advances may pro-                   randomized trial. Am J Prev Med. Jul 2012; 43(1).
                                  vide a new channel through which to reach and                   22. Barlow SE, Dietz WH. Obesity evaluation and treatment: expert
                                                                                                      committee recommendations. Pediatrics. Sep 1998;102(3).
                                  engage large audiences of young people. The
                                  complex, challenging public health problem of child                 doi:10.1542/peds.102.3.e29.
                                                                                                  23. Dietz WH, Gortmaker SL. Preventing obesity in children and
                                  obesity will undoubtedly require multifaceted inter-                adolescents. Annu Rev Public Health . 2001;22: 337-353.
                                  ventions. Harnessing mobile, multimodal, interac-                   doi:10.1146/annurev.publhealth.22.1.337.
                                                                                                  24. Beck RC. Motivation: Theories and Principles. 5th ed. Upper
                                  tive mHealth tools broadens the range of resources                  Saddle River: Prentice Hall;2004.

TBM                                                                                                                                             page 413 of 415
  PRACTICE AND PUBLIC HEALTH POLICIES






                                       25. Jordan-Marsh M.         Health Technology Literacy: A              53. Golan M, Crow S. Targeting parents exclusively in the treatment

                                            Transdisciplinary Framework for Consumer-Oriented Practice.           of childhood obesity: long-term results. Obes Res. 2004;12(2):
                                            Sudbury, MA: Jones & Bartlett Learning; 2011.                         357-361. doi:10.1038/oby.2004.45.
                                       26. Collins LM, Murphy SA, Strecher V. The multiphase optimiza-        54. Kitzman-Ulrich H, Wilson DK, St George SM, Lawman H, Segal

                                            tion strategy (MOST) and the sequential multiple assignment           M, Fairchild A. The integration of a family systems approach for
                                            randomized trial (SMART) —new methods for more potent                 understanding youth obesity, physical activity, and dietary
                                            eHealth interventions. Am J Prev Med. 2007;32(5): S112-S118.          programs. Clin Child Fam Psychol Rev. 2010;13(3): 231-253.

                                       27. Noar SM, Benac CN, Harris MS. Does tailoring matter? Meta-             doi:10.1007/s10567-010-0073-0.
                                            analytic review of tailored print health behavior change          55. Kitzmann KM, Beech BM. Family-based interventions for
                                            interventions. Psychol Bull. 2007;133(4): 673-693.                    pediatric obesity: methodological and conceptual challenges
                                       28. Woolford SJ, Barr KLC, Derry HA, et al. OMG do not say LOL:            from family psychology. J Fam Psychol. 2006;20(2): 175-189.

                                            obese adolescents' perspectives on the content of text messages       doi:10.1037/0893-3200.20.2.175.
                                            to enhance weight loss efforts. Obesity. 2011;19(12): 2382-2387.  56. Barlow SE, Ohlemeyer CL. Parent reasons for nonreturn to a
                                            doi:10.1038/oby.2011.266.                                             pediatric weight management program.           Clin Pediatr .

                                       29. Nigg CR. Technology's in ﬂuence on physical activity and               2006;45(4): 355-360. doi:10.1177/000992280604500408.
                                            exercise science: the present and the future. Psychol Sport       57. Goldﬁeld GS, Epstein LH, Kilanowski CK, Paluch RA, Kogut-
                                            Exerc. 2003;4(1): 57-65.                                              Bossler B. Cost-effectiveness of group and mixed family-based

                                       30. Hurling R, Fairley BW, Dias MB. Internet-based exercise                treatment for childhood obesity. Int J Obes. 2001;25(12): 1843-
                                            intervention systems: are more interactive designs better?            1849. doi:10.1038/sj.ijo.0801838.
                                            Psychol Health. Dec 2006;21(6).                                   58. Sanchez J, Salinas A, Saenz M. Mobile game-based methodology

                                       31. Collins LM, Murphy SA, Bierman KL. A conceptual framework for          for science learning. Human Computer Interaction: HCI Applications
                                            adaptive preventive interventions. Prev Sci. 2004;5(3): 185-196.      and Services Lecture Notes in Computer Scienc.e2007;4553: 322-331.
                                       32. Rabipour S, Raz A. Training the brain: fact and fad in cognitive   59. Rossi WC, Reynolds W, Nelson RM. Child assent and parental

                                            and behavioral remediation. Brain Cogn. 2012; 79(2): 159-179.         permission in pediatric research.       Theor Med Bioeth .
                                       33. Woolford SJ, Clark SJ, Strecher VJ, Resnicow K. Tailored mobile        2003;24(2): 131-148. doi:10.1023/a:1024690712019.
                                            phone text messages as an adjunct to obesity treatment for        60. Oudshoorn N. How places matter: telecare technologies and

                                            adolescents. J Telemed Telecare. 2010;16(8): 458-461.                 the changing spatial dimensions of healthcare. Soc Stud Sci.
                                       34. Krukowski RA, Harvey-Berino J, Ashikaga T, Thomas CS, Micco N.         2012;42(1): 121-142. doi:10.1177/0306312711431817.
                                            Internet-based weight control: the relationship between web       61. Zickuhr K,& Smith A. The Power of Mobile . Pew Research

                                            features and weight loss.Telemed J E-Health. 2008;14(8): 775-782.     Center's Internet & American Life Project, Washington, DC
                                       35. Irvine L, Falconer DW, Jones C, Ricketts IW, Williams B, Crombie       (Apr 13, 2012). http://www.pewinternet.org/Reports/2012/
                                            IK. Can text messages reach the parts other process measures          Digital-differences/Main-Rep ort/The-power- of-mobile.aspx ,

                                            cannot reach: an evaluation of a behavior change intervention         Accessed April 8, 2013.
                                            delivered by mobile phone?         Plos One . 2012;7(12).         62. Wang Y, Beydoun MA. The obesity epidemic in the United
                                            doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0052621.                                     States—gender, age, socioeconomic, racial/ethnic, and geo-

                                       36. Lenfant C. Shattuck Lecture: clinical research to clinical             graphic characteristics: a systematic review and meta-regres-
                                            practice—lost in translation? N Engl J Med. Aug 28 2003;349(9).       sion analysis. Epidemiol Rev. 2007;29: 6-28. doi:10.1093/
                                       37. Anderson J, Rainie L. The Future of Apps and Web. Pew Internet         epirev/mxm007.

                                            & American Life Project.                                          63. Hurling R, Catt M, Boni MD, et al. Using internet and mobile phone
                                       38. Whittaker R. Issues in mHealth: ﬁndings from key informant             technology to deliver an automated physical activity program:
                                            interviews. J Med Internet Res. Sep-Oct 2012;14(5).                   randomized controlled trial. J Med Internet Res. 2007; 9(2).

                                       39. Chen G, Yan B, Kotz D, Berke E. MPCS: mobile-phone based           64. Zhu FQ, Mariappan A, Boushey CJ, et al. Technology-Assisted
                                            patient compliance system for chronic illness care. http://           Dietary Assessment . Paper presented at: Conference on
                                            www.westwirelesshealth.org.                                           Computational Imaging VI; Jan 28-29, 2008;San Jose, CA.
                                       40. Luxton DD, Kayl RA, Mishkind MC. mHealth data security: the        65. McKetta S, Rich M. The fault, dear viewer, lies not in the

                                            need for HIPAA-compliant standardization. Telemed E-Health.           screens, but in ourselves: relationships between screen media
                                            2012;18(4): 284-288.                                                  and childhood overweight/obesity. Pediatr Clin N Am. 2011;
                                       41. American Telemedicine Association (October, 2009). Practice            58(6):1493–1508.

                                            Guidelines for Videoconferen cing-Based Telemental Health .       66. Andersen RE, Crespo CJ, Bartlett SJ, Cheskin LJ, Pratt M.
                                            Available at http://www.americantelemed.org/docs/default-             Relationship of physical activity and television watching with
                                            source/standards/practice-guidelines-for-videoconferencing-           body weight and level of fatness among children—results from

                                            based-telemental-health.pdf?sfvrsn=6 (Retrieved on April 15,          the Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey.
                                            2013).                                                                JAMA. 1998;279(12): 938–942.
                                       42. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Draft Guidance for Industry     67. Anderson SE, Whitaker RC. Household routines and obesity in

                                            and Food and Drug Administration Staff —Mobile Medical                US preschool-aged children. Pediatrics. 2010;125(3): 420-428.
                                            Applications . Retrieved April 14, 2013, from         http://     68. Epstein LH, Roemmich JN, Robinson JL, et al. A randomized trial of
                                            www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/DeviceRegulationandGuidance/               the effects of reducing television viewing and computer use on

                                            GuidanceDocuments/ucm263280.htm#5. July 21, 2011.                     body mass index in young children. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med.
                                       43. INSTITUTE NMT. Connecting the mobile health ecosystem.                 2008;162(3): 239-245. doi1:0.1001/archpediatrics.2007.45.
                                            December, 2012; http://www.mhealthsummit.org/program-             69. Schneider M, Dunton GF, Cooper DM. Media use and obesity in

                                            details/nih-mhealth-training-institute. Accessed November, 2012.      adolescent females[ast]. Obesity. 2007;15(9): 2328-2335.
                                       44. Graham JW, Cumsille PE, Elek-Fisk E. Methods for handling          70. Rideout VJ, Foehr UG, Roberts DF.Generation M2: Media in the Lives
                                            missing data.                                                         of 8–18 Year Olds. Menlo Park: Kaiser Family Foundation; 2010.

                                       45. Schwartz JE, Stone AA. Strategies for analyzing ecological         71. Healy GN, Dunstan DW, Salmon J, et al. Breaks in sedentary
                                            momentary assessment data. Health Psychol. Jan 1998;17(1).            time—beneﬁcial associations with metabolic risk. Diabetes
                                       46. Stokols D, Hall KL, Taylor BK, Moser RP. The science of team           Care. Apr 2008; 31(4).

                                            science—overview of the ﬁeld and introduction to the supple-      72. Montola M, Stenros J, Waern A. Pervasive Games: Theory and
                                            ment. Am J Prev Med. Aug 2008;35(2).                                  Design. Electronic: Morgan Kaufmann; 2009.
                                       47. Anderson JW, Konz EC, Frederich RC, Wood CL. Long-term             73. Jaakko S, Annika W, Markus M. Studying the elusive experience

                                            weight-loss maintenance: a meta-analysis of US studies. Am J          in pervasive games. Simul Gaming. 2012; 43(3):339-355.
                                            Clin Nutr. 2001;74(5): 579-584.                                   74. Swing EL, Gentile DA, Anderson CA, Walsh DA. Television and
                                       48. Brownell KD, Jeffery RW. Improving long-term weight loss:              video game exposure and the development of attention

                                            pushing the limits of treatment. Behav Ther. 1987;18(4): 353-         problems. Pediatrics. 2010;126(2): 214-221.
                                            374. doi:10.1016/S0005-7894(87)80004-7.                           75. Landhuis CE, Poulton R, Welch D, Hancox RJ. Does childhood
                                       49. Wing RR, Phelan S. Long-term weight loss maintenance. Am J             television viewing lead to attention problems in adolescence?

                                            Clin Nutr. 2005;82(1): 222S-225S.                                     Results from a prospective longitudinal study.     Pediatrics.
                                       50. Burke LE, Styn MA, Sereika SM, Conroy MB, Ye L, Glanz K, . . .         2007;120(3): 532-537.
                                            Ewing LJ. Using mHealth technology to enhance self-monitoring     76. Davis C. Attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder: associations
                                            for weight loss: a randomized trial. Am J Prev Med. 2012;43(1).       withovereatingand obesity. CurrPsychiatryRep. 2010;12(5): 389-

                                            doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2012.03.016.                                     395.
                                       51. Wadden TA, West DS, Delahanty LM, et al. The look AHEAD            77. Braet C, Claus L, Verbeken S, Van Vlierberghe L. Impulsivity in
                                            study: a description of the lifestyle intervention and the            overweight children. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2007;16(8):

                                            evidence supporting it. Obesity. 2006;14(5): 737-752.                 473-483.
                                       52. Epstein LH, Valoski A, Wing RR, McCurley J. Ten-year outcomes of   78. Bavelier D, Green CS, Han DH, Renshaw PF, Merzenich MM,
                                            behavioral family-based treatment for childhood obesity. Heal         Gentile DA. Brains on video games. Nat Rev Neurosci. Dec

                                            Psychol. 1994; 13(5): 373-383. d: 0.1037/0278-6133.13.5.373.          2011;12(12).

page 414 of 415                                                                                                                                                             TBM
                                                                                                     PRACTICE AND PUBLIC HEALTH POLICIES






                                        79. Boot WR, Kramer AF, Simons DJ, Fabiani M, Gratton G. The           91. Dunton GF, Cousineau M, Reynolds KD. The intersection of
                                            effects of video game playing on attention, memory, and                public policy and health behavior theory in the physical activity

                                            executive control. Acta Psychol. Nov 2008; 129(3).                     arena. J Phys Act Heal. 2010;7: S91-S98.
                                        80. Green CS, Bavelier D. Effect of action video games on the          92. Bandura A. Health promotion by social cognitive meaHne.alth Educ
                                            spatial distribution of visuospatial attention. J Exp Psychol Hum      Behav. 2004;31(2): 143-164. do1i:0.1177/109019810426366.0

                                            Percept Perform. Dec 2006; 32(6).                                  93. Ryan RM, Deci EL. Self-determination theory and the facilitation
                                        81. Staiano AE, Abraham AA, Calv ert SL. Competitive versus                of intrinsic motivation, social development, and well-being. Am
                                            cooperative exergame play for African American adolescents'            Psychol. 2000;55(1): 68-78.

                                            executive function skills: short-term effects in a long-term       94. Youth CoFMatDoCa. Food Marketing to Children and Youth:
                                            training intervention. Dev Psychol. Mar 2012; 48(2).                   Threat or Opportunity? The National Academies Press; 2006.
                                        82. Best JR. Exergaming immediately enhances children's executive      95. Padilla-Walker LM, Coyne SM, Fraser AM. Getting a high-speed

                                            function. Dev Psychol. Sep 2012; 48(5).                                family connection: associations between family media use and
                                        83. Nouchi R, Taki Y, Takeuchi H, et al. Brain training game improves      family connection. Fam Relat. Jul 2012; 61(3).
                                            executive functions and processing speed in the elderly: a         96. Deterding SS, M., Nacke L, O'Hara K, Dixon D. Gamiﬁcation

                                            randomized controlled trial. Plos One. Jan 11 2012; 7(1).              Using Game-Design Elements in Non-Gaming Contexts. Paper
                                        84. Jolles DD, Crone EA. Training the developing brain: a                  presented at: Proceedingsof the 2011 annual conference extended
                                            neurocognitive perspective. Front Hum Neurosci. Apr 2012; 6.           abstracts on Human factors in computing systems. 2011.
                                        85. Tomalski P, Johnson MH. The effects of early adversity on the adult97. Deterding S, Dixon D, Khaled R. Gami ﬁcation: toward a

                                            and developing brain. Curr Opin Psychiatry. 2010;23(3): 233-238.        deﬁnition. Chi 2011. 2011.
                                            doi:10.1097/YCO.0b013e3283387a8c.                                  98. Chaput JP, Doucet E, Tremblay A. Obesity: a disease or a biological
                                        86. Bohbot VD, Gupta M, Banner H, Dahmani L. Caudate nucleus-              adaptation? An update. Obes Rev. 2012;13(8): 681-691.

                                            dependent response strategies in a virtual navigation task are     99. Institute NC. Cell phones and cancer risk: fact sheet.
                                            associated with lower basal cortisol and impaired episodic        100. Colwell J, Payne J. Negative correlates of computer game play in
                                            memory. Neurobiol Learn Mem. 2011;96(2): 173-180.                      adolescents. Br J Psychol. 2000;91: 295-310.

                                        87. Glasgow RE, Lichtenstein E, Marcus AC. Why don't we see           101. Subrahmanyam K, Kraut RE, Greenﬁeld PM, Gross EF. The
                                            more translation of health promotion research to practice?             impact of home computer use on children's activities and
                                            Rethinking the efﬁcacy-to-effectiveness transition. Am J Public        development. Futur Child. 2000;10(2): 123-144.

                                            Health. Aug 2003; 93(8).                                          102. Green LA, Seifert CM. Translation of research into practice: why we
                                        88. Kumar S, Nilsen W, Abernethy A, Atienza AA, Patrick K, Pavel M,        can't “just do it”. JAmBoardofFamPract  . Nov-Dec 2005; 18(6).
                                            Riley WT, Shar A, Spring B, Spruijit-Metz D, Hedeker D, Honavar   103. Armstrong AW, Harskamp CT, Cheeney S, Wu J, Schupp CW.

                                            V, Kravitz RL, Carig R, Levebvre RC, Mohr DC, Murphy SA, Quinn         Power of crowdsourcing: novel methods of data collection in psoriasis
                                            CC, Shusterman V, & Swendeman D. (in press) mHealth                    and psoriatic arthritisJ. Am Acad Dermato.l2012;67(6): 1273-1281.
                                            evidence workshop—exploring innovative methods to evaluate             doi:10.1016/j.jaad.2012.05.01.3
                                            the efﬁcacy and safety of mobile health. Am J Prev Med.           104. World Health Organization.     Marketing of Food and Non-

                                        89. Whittaker R, Merry S, Dorey E, Maddison R. A development and           Alcoholic Beverages to Children: Report of a WHO Forum and
                                            evaluation process for mHealth interventions: examples from            Technical Meeting. Paper presented at the Geneva: WHO, Oslo,
                                            New Zealand. J Heal Commun. 2012;17: 11-21. doi:10.1080/               Norway; 2-5 May 2006.

                                            10810730.2011.649103.                                             105. Westen T. Government regulation of food marketing to children:
                                        90. Eysenbach G, CONSORT-EHEALTH Group. CONSORT-EHEALTH:                   the Federal Trade Commission and the kid-vid controversy. Loy
                                            improving and standardizing evaluation reports of web-based            LAL Rev. 2006;39: 79.

                                            and mobile health interventions. J Med Internet Res. 2011;        106. Estrin D, Sim I. Open mHealth architecture: an engine for health
                                            13(4). doi:10.2196/jmir.1923.                                          care innovation. Science. Nov 5 2010; 330(6005).



























































TBM                                                                                                                                                                 page 415 of 415