                     Mobile Medical Disaster Relief     Technology:
                    Enhancing Communication,       Medical Logistics,

                        Data Creation, and Crisis    Mapping for
                                Vulnerable Communities

                                            By


                                       Kira Intrator

                     BAHigh Honors inComparative     Religious Studies.
                         Concentrationin Peace &Conflict Studies.
                                 Haverford College (2005)


                 Submitted to theDepartmentof Urban Studies and Planning            ARCHIVES
                  in partiafulfillmentof the requirementsfor the degree of
                                                                              MASSACHIJTrS  INSTITUTE
                                  Master in City Planning

                                           at the                                    'W


                   MASSACHUSETTS       INSTITUTEOF TECHNOLOGY

                                        June 2012

                         0 2012 Kira Intrator. All Rights Reserved


         The author here by grants to MITthe permissionto reproduce and to distribute
        publicly paper and electronicopies ofthe thesis document in whole or in part in
                         any medium now known   or hereafter created.




Author
                                             Department of Urban  Studies andPlanning
                                                                         May 22, 2012

Certified by
                                        -1-
                                                              ProfessorJoseph Ferreira
                                             Departmentof Urban Studies  and Planning
                                                                     Thesis Supervisor
                               /Y      .1

Accepted by

                                                                Professor Alan Berger
                                                               Chair,MCP Committee
                                             Departmentof Urban  Studies and Planning

               MOBILE      MEDICAL DISASTER          RELIEF TECHNOLOGY:

                     ENHANCING     COMMUNICATION,      MEDICAL    LOGISTICS,
                          DATA CREATION,     AND CRISIS  MAPPING    FOR
                                  VULNERABLE     COMMUNITIES


                                                by


                                          Kira Intrator

         Submitted  to the Department   of Urban Studies and Planning    on May 22, 2012

      in partial fulfillmentof the requirements  for the degree of Master in City Planning

ABSTRACT


        This thesis explores the field of disaster relief and recovery, and the application of emerging
technologies that are both used by, and use the data generated by communities affected by natural
disaster. This thesis analyzes humanitarian disaster relief logistconducted in Haiti following the

devastation of the January 2010 earthquake, and melds this analysis with disaster relief technology
design, thus applying a need-based approach to the creation of a new disaster relief technology -
Mobile Medical Emergency Responders (MMER).
        The first section of the thesis establishes a foundation for both the global and localized need

for a telephony system such as the one I am designing - MMER.  It does so by examining issues such
as disaster relief coordination and information management challenges in Haiti, with the concurrent
need for direct communication between volunteers and affected communities. It uncovers the
challenges of disaster relief logistics and the medical supply chain, and the way in which MMER's

crisismapping  component responds directly to these vulnerabilities. Low physician density apitiful
health care access is underscored, further supporting the need for the direcmedical guidance and
knowledge provided through MMER to its caller. Fundamentally,      the global issue of illiteracy is

stressed, in addition to the dearth of disaster relief technology to address this gap. This need is
addressed by the unique position of MMER as a voice-enabled system.
        After both the context and need for MMER are established, the specification of the
technology that could respond to these challenges is created and presented in MMER's system design.

The concept of MMER is critiqued and vetted by disaster relief professionals, its design further
revised, and a site selection analysis is carried out through geospatial exclusion to determine which
region is best suited for the launch and use of MMER. Finally, a usability pilot survey is assembled in
order to obtain a deeper understanding of the regional and local cultural context in which MMER

would be implemented, and to analyze the interviewees' current access and use of mobile phones and
medical services.
        A humanitarian disaster relief tool, MMER would be low (to no) cost for its immediate users.
Catering to illiterate, disaster-affected communities, MMER would make it possible to unite affected

communities and their self-reported needs directly to global volunteers and medical expertise, and to
provide isolated communities in developing countries access to healthcare information through land-
lines and mobile phones.



Thesis Supervisor:   Joseph Ferreira
Title: Professor of Urban Planning and Operations Research,     Associate  Department Head and

Head  of Urban  Information Systems  Group

Thesis Reader: Steve Chan

Title: Princeof Wales Senior Fellow  and Chief Architect, MIT International Development
Initiative



                                                                                                 3
                                 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Thesis Advising
My gratitude goes to Professor Joseph Ferreira, my advisor, for your help and guidance in the thesis

writing process. My deep-felt thanks to Dr. Steve Chan, my thesis reader and mentor, for being
instrumental through his mentorship, guidance and novel approach to both International Development
and technology design throughout the process of conceptualizing and developing MMER. I have
learned a tremendous amount under your tutelage, and very much look forward to our continued
partnership and future work together.


I would like to thank my amazing co-thesis advisors   Dr. Nigel Snoad of Google, and Dr. David
Metcalf, Director of the Mixed Emerging Technology Lab at the University of Central Florida for
your direct supervision and mentorship during the Summer of 2012, in addition to your continued
support for the MMER project throughout the process. Dr. Snoad, your insight, support, and guidance

in the field of disaster relief and technology development has been so enriching - thank you for being
so generous with your knowledge and time. Dr. Metcalf, thank you so much for your graceful
leadership, and technological help. The staff and students at UCF's METIL    lab were equally kind,
knowledgeable, and patient - thank you.


Expert Guidance
Much thanks to the medical, business and cultural guidance and context provided by Dr. Leo Anthony
Celi and Meredith McLaughlin at Harvard-MIT Health Science and Technology Institute, Will
Guyster at the Legatum Entrepreneurial Center, and Dr. Tracy St. Benoit from UCF. Thank you to

Professor Wescoat of MIT, for your great support in the initial conceptualization of the thesis structure
and approach.

Additional thanks to Luke Read   at the University of Central Florida, and to Sertac Karaman at MIT
for your technical guidance and patience.


For being so generous with your time and expertise in the interview process, I wish to thank Jennifer
Chan, Jacobo Quintanillo, and Dr. Jamilah Mahmood.

Funding and Support

I wish to thank the thesis' funding sources: the University of Wales Global Academy, the Prince
Edward Fellowship, the Public Service Center/DUSP     Internship Summer Grant,   the Department of
Urban Planning's Emerson Travel Grant, and the generous support of the Abramsky family for
believing in the potential of MMER. These sources supported my thesis-related     research, MMER
prototyping, coding work at the University of Central Florida and summer internship at Google in

disaster relief technology.

My deep-felt thanks finally goes to the Legatum Center for Development and Entrepreneurship, not
only for the financial support, but also for guidance in my business plan writing and through the
process of translation of MMER into a sustainable business model and social enterprise venture.


Personal
My DUSP peers at MIT have been the backbone of my education. I especially wish to thank Julia
Tierney for your wonderful company as my thesis-writing companion. My     tremendous gratitude goes

to my family, and especially my mother, Alexa Intrator, for your amazing editing skills and support.








                                                                                                  4



KiraIntrator





PREFACE

       This thesis explores thefield of disaster relief and recovery,and the application of
       emerging   technologies that  are both used by,    and use the data generated     by
                                                                   both the problems and
       communities affected   by natural disaster. By examining
       gaps presented in current    disaster relief technology,  I propose an alternative
       design for a disaster recovery  system, one that adds to and  enhances the capacity
       of disaster relief and  the recovery of disaster-affected community in numerous
       ways. In thefirst section of the thesisI arguefor the global and localizedneed   for

       a telephony  system such as the  one I am designing   - Mobile Medical Emergency
       Responders   (MMER). In    the second part   of my thesis  I provide the   'proof of
       concept'  of MMER: I present     its system architecture, in addition to  interviews
       conducted with    disaster relief specialists,a site selection  within Haiti using
       Geographic   Information System    (GIS) criteria, a fieldtest design, and pilot test

       survey proposal.

This thesis investigates Mobile Medical Emergency Responders        (MMER), a telephony system
that is catered to the   needs and context of humanitarian      assisted disaster relief efforts in
developing countries. The ultimate goal of MMER       is to mobilize thousands of medical experts

around the world to provide medical   advice remotely to disaster-affected populations. I examine
how different types of technologies might be integrated to provide this system. The system design
I present is modular in nature to adapt     to future technological change, while the particular
technologies proposed    in the thesis are appropriate for and adapted    to current needs.    For
example, I propose the integration of Interactive   Voice Response (IVR) to achieve scale and

sustainability, wherein the caller describes their symptoms to and through an Interactive    Voice
Response (IVR) system.    The call is subsequently routed, with the support of  IBM's Watson, to
the appropriate medical   specialist. I employ the Interactive Voice Response    telephony system
both as a means to decrease   costs for routing and responding  to the users' calls, and due to its
ability to handle large call volumes.      However, these technological     selections should   be

understood  as choices made within   a fast-paced and ever-evolving environment of   technological
options  (e.g., mobile phone   upgrades, increased speed,   data capacity, efficiency). Hence the
technology selected  for MMER is based upon    current needs, access, and telephony  capabilities in
developing countries.  Conversely, when MMER's system design is placed       within a longer-term
framework, the technology selected should be understood to be modular in nature, so as to allow

MMER's design to be more     adaptive to change, and to enhance the ease of MMER's      capacity to
be augmented over time.

Unlike  other disaster-relief applicationsthat rely heavilyon MMS or SMS, the MMER          system

has the potentialto open up aid and medical  access to illiterate populations.his is due to the fact
that MMER is voice-enabled,    and furthermore allows   any mobile or land line  phone user to tap
into MMER's resources.    This key element - that  of enabling illiterate populationsto utilize and
tap into the emerging field of   disaster relief technology to access critical medical   diagnostic
advice - will prove centralto the need for MMER    and how  it isniquely positioned  in this field.


At the back  end, the MMER system      produces a  user-generated medical   crisis map for disaster
relieflogistics and medical  supply chain management purposes.    This is executed by enabling its
users to contribute high   provenance and pedigree     data regarding information    such as their
location, ailment, and  medical need, which is   subsequently captured in  a database, aggregated

with other such data, and converted  into a crisis map.


                                                                                                  8
Kira Intrator



Methodology
The first section of the thesis (Chapters One to Five) serves to identify gaps and problems within
the field of disaster relief technology, and to review alternativesin response to these challenges.
This  portion of the thesis establishes a foundation for   both the global and localized need for
MMER. It does so by examining issues such
                                                   as disaster relief coordination and information
management challenges in Haiti, with      the concurrent need for direct communication between
volunteers and affected communities. Ituncovers the    challenges of disaster relief logistics and the
medical supply chain, and the way in       which MMER's crisis mapping component responds
directly to this gap. Low physician density   and pitiful health care access is underscored, further

supporting the need for the direct medical   guidance and knowledge provided through MMER to
its caller. Fundamentally, the global   issue of illiteracy is stressed, in addition to the dearth of
disaster relief technology to address this gap. This need is responded to by the unique  position of
MMER as a voice-enabled system.


The second section of   the thesis (commencing at Chapter Six) presents and develops     the system
design of Mobile Medical Emergency Responders (MMER)                in relation to its user cycle,
telephony components,     technical  dependencies, and potential limitations in field.   Interviews
conducted with leading humanitarian        disaster relief experts in the
                                                                             fields of technology,
communications,    and community-based initiatives are reported, and        their feedback for the
MMER system      is examined within the context of MMER's design. A site selection       analysis is
then carried out for Haiti through geospatial exclusion to determine    which region is best suited
for launching and using  MMER. Due to the vital need for    design feedback and usability  analysis,
I generate  a user-centric survey for the selected region that would serve as a next step from the

proof of concept, in the pilot stage of MMER.          The  goal  of the survey is to provide an
understanding of my users' needs, such   as their access to health care, and familiarity with similar
voice-enabled applications.  In conclusion, I summarize my findings, and examine the pathway      to
MMER's implementation, providing       a vision for future research and recommendations for next

steps.


                                                  Thesis Outline
                                                  Chapter One presents two areas that will provide

                                                  a foundational    context   to  Mobile    Medical
                                                  Emergency Responders (MMER). The first is
     HaWtht                                       the type and form of disaster management      and
   Inftma   "ol                                   coordination that was conducted   in Haiti - which
 L   e  ns                     A
                                                  includes the urban complexity and information
                                                  management    challenges of the relief efforts. The
                        .I                        second provides    the historical context of the
                I                                 disaster management    field (see Figure 1). The
                                                  latter will provide
                                                                      key definitions and models,
                                                  and help locate the theoretical space that disaster
                                                  relief technology and MMER occupy.

Figure 1: ContextualizingSub-Fields             Chapters Two to Five (see Figure 2) explore the

                                                interconnected fields that MMER is influenced by
and exists within: (I) the use of  mobile phones and the application of crisis communication in
disaster relief, (II) emergency medicine and supply chain logistics, and (III) the emerging field of
mobile  health (mHealth). Finally Chapter Five (part IV, Figure 2) underscores the existing
technology gap in the field of disaster relief. It serves to connect and conclude how each of the

previous three sections set the stage for the need for MMER. Moreover, Chapter Five argues the


                                                                                                  9
Kira Intrator


                              MMER                              MnDisasterRelbef
need  for a technology - like
-  that serves  illiteratepopulations
through  a voice-enabled  and  voice-
based system.

                                                                MobileMedical
Chapter Six delves into the details                   a      EmergencResponder
of the voice-enabled      emergency              Givi  ce         (MMER)
response   system and    outlines the

system  design  of MMER,     from the
way    in   which   the   technology
functions through to the way in                                    mileaslh
which   the user  interacts with  the                            (Mobieealth

system.                                                           T-h-OIOy)

Chapter   Seven presents     feedback
from leading   humanitarian   disaster  Figure2: Sub-Fieldsof MMER

relief professionals  on the  MMER
concept,  and seeks to integrate these critiques into MMER's   design and  the project's next steps.
This section  is followed by a site selection analysis to identify the setting and region  in which
MMER     would be  most successful   and of the most use in  Haiti. Finally,a user-based   survey is

created for a future usabilityand pilot study. The  survey seeks to capture users' medical and  cell
phone  access and usage  through a mixture  ofmultiple-choice  and open-ended   questions.

Having  completed   the empirical analysis,proof  of concept, and design  of MMER,    Chapter Eight

reviews the  particulars of how the MMER       requirements  were configured,   and looks ahead   to
provide  a pathway  to implementation.


































                                                                                                  10
Kira Intrator







  1. FOUNDATIONAL          CONTEXT: DISASTER RELIEF EFFORTS IN HAITI AND
                           DISASTER MANAGEMENT               THEORY.



1.1 Haiti:DisasterRelief& Coordination

Decades of weak state apparatus and governance help explain-to a certain extent-the level of

devastation as well as Haiti's slow pace of recovery caused by the 7.0 Mw' magnitude earthquake

- with an epicenter 16 miles west of Haiti's capital, Port-au-Prince - that hit Haiti on January 12,
2010 (ICVA, 2010). Prior to the 2010 earthquake, aid was delivered to the Haitian
                                                                                         population
through non-governmental organizations (NGO's) who-in lieu of the government-had          provided

the Haitian population with essential services (Farmer, 2010),  earning Haiti  the nickname  of the

"Kingdom of NGOs". One important consequence of providing aid primarily through         NGOs was

a failure to provideor strengthen the accountability or capacity of Haitian government institutions

(Oxfam 2011    and Kristoff et al., 2010). Yet, different analysts provide mixed interpretations of

the role and impact   that international NGOs had played in Haiti. North American NGO's, for

example, claim that they had considerable experience with civil society, employed participatory
approaches, and that their presence was one that was inclusive in that they worked alongside local

NGO's (InterAction, 2010). In contrast, other evaluators claim that international   NGOs did not

collaborate greatly with, or build the capacity of localNGO's (Farmer 2010 and CARE 2005 &

2009). In this context, agenciesdid not enter a neutral-operating environment after the earthquake

of January 2010 that hit  Port-au-Prince and its surroundings, killing 220,000,   injuring 300,000

and  leaving 1.3 million homeless in its wake (Grunewald et al., 2010).



Post-earthquake, organizations were faced with a dilemma of either seeking collaboration        and
leadership  from a fragile government, or conducting relief responses
                                                                          independently (with the
latter sometimes yielding a quicker pace).   The already-weakened Haitian government structure

had suffered tremendous    staff loss and was struggling to respond; it was therefore common for

aid agencies to bypass local structures. Coordination with national authorities was minor at best;

according to the inter-agency real-time evaluation report, few agencies informed or consulted

communities either concerning what they - the agencies - were doing or why they were there



1 Mw denotes themoment magnitude scale, or the size of the earthquake by the energy released. According to the
USGS' glossary of terms "The magnitude is based on the seismic moment of the earthquake, which is equal to the
rigidity of the Earth multipby the average amount of slip on the fault and the size areathat slipped"
(http://earthquake.usgs.gov/earthquakes/glossary.php#magnitude)


                                                                                                 11
Kira Intrator



(Grunewald, 2010). Yet again, the same historical consequence of NGO's lack of coordination

with the government came back to the fore: the general lack of coordination with the Haitian

government and national authorities could be said to have continued to undermine the role of

national authorities and the state's capacity to act. Moreover, by failing systematically to involve

and partner with affected communities in the humanitarian disaster relief response, community
capacity could also be seen as being weakened, rather than
                                                               strengthened or empowered in and
through the international humanitarian  disaster-relief process (Grunewald, 2010, p.5).



The United Nation's organizational "cluster     system" made up of eleven groupings of NGOs,

international organizations and UN agencies around a service provided       during a humanitarian

crisis (e.g., Education, Health, Emergency Shelter, Camp         Coordination   and Management,

Logistics,  and Emergency      Telecommunications)    did  not aid   in alleviating  the issue of
coordination.2
               The  system  buckled and failed to integrate, organize, and coordinate the hundreds
of humanitarian actors who came rushing in to Haiti. In addition to information sharing and

transparency being limited within the cluster system, there was also an absence of strategic vision

and overall coherence of the response (IASC, 2010). UN cluster coordination meetings     were held

in English, ostracizing locals and making national    staff inaccessible.Most  frustrating was the

weak leadership demonstrated among       cluster leaders and those at the top of the UN system,

delaying the potential  for collaboration not only by weeks, but by five months (ICVA, 2010).
Although Humanitarian-Military Coordination can be a sensitive and contentious area, especially

for humanitarian aid workers who seek neutrality both in approach and     image,  Sir John Holmes

(former under-secretary general for humanitarian responses at the UN) believes it is a challenge

that must be overcome. The US military in Haiti was trying to identify a strong humanitarian-led

coordination   structure, yet  it was   extremely slow to materialize (IRIN, October 2010).

Operational problems arose out of and in tandem to the breakdown of coordination. Needs

assessments were     duplicative and   often partial; overall security  and protection responses
(especially to sexual and gender-based violence in camps)    were inadequate; sanitation solutions

were  deficient; and transitional shelter was not provided at scale.



Urban Disaster Recovery

The path to disaster relief, recovery and resilience is further complicated by the urban locus of

Haiti's disaster. The earthquake struck less than one mile off the coast of Port-au-Prince, Haiti's

capital city; and according to the CIA Factbook approximately    two million Haitians live in what

2For more informationhttp):/unmit. unnissions.org/Default.asp'760bid



                                                                                                 12
Kira Intrator


is categorized as an 'urban area' (CIA Factbook, 2011). It is therefore important to analyze the

mistakes  made in Port-au-Prince in light of the complexity of urban structures and recovery.



There is consensus amongst development analysts that "the humanitarian system is largely

unprepared for responding to urban disasters" (Ferris, 2010 and World Bank, 2010). Ferris (2010)
briefly touches upon the difficulty of working in an urban, as opposed to rural environment,

where the former "is a more complex undertaking for humanitarian actors than running refugee

camps  in rural areas" (Ferris, 2010.) Dimensions of urban complexity  in disaster relief include the

range of actors present, the pace, as well as the services, infrastructure, and sheer concentrations

of people involved. In addition to these elements, other dimensions that require us to reframe the
way in which urban, as opposed to rural disaster relief and recovery   operates are issues such as

housing (short term versus long-term and tradeoffs of each), commerce and trade, and the use and

concentration of markets (where agencies work with local markets        as opposed to competing

unfairly with them).


As previously   mentioned, working with and through municipalities,     as well as partnering with

pre-existing local providers and structures was limitedin scope in the humanitarian relief efforts -

with exceptions such as Tearfund's work with local    government representatives in L6ogane and

Gressier (Clermont,    2011). This overarching   trend of not partnering with state or existing

community-based organizations    did not assist in rebuilding local social or humancapacity, a key
to building Haiti's  future resilience to shocks. The presence of politics  is also different when

comparing rural  and urban areas. Whereas rural regions are sometimes    characterized as detached

from or absent of government, urban areas are not. Although the Haitian government was

weak(ened), state bodies such as the Direction Nationale de L 'EauPotable et de l'Assainissement

(DINEPA) still played    an important role in recovery. Agencies such as the British Red    Cross,

Age UK, and Oxfam worked with DINEPA in water provision and although these agencies might
have made a trade-off  of a slower direct delivery, the partnership and collaborationith DINEPA

ultimately strengthened   longer-term recovery   (Clermont, 2011). According    to a post-disaster

survey data of  10,430 responses (interviewed  between 3/14/2010 and    5/2/2010 and complied   by

MIT's Engineering    and Systems Division    Class ESD934) 'finding    a job' was the responders'

number   one priority (over housingand food).


Capacity building   and training in  urban centers takes   on increased  importance, not   only in

building resilience pre-disaster,ut also in recovery.A good example    of collaborationand putting



                                                                                                 13
Kira Intrator



local individuals to work was the collaboration established by the British Red Cross with       local

associations in the neighborhood of Delmas 19 (located near        the waterfront) to improve their

environment by contributing their labor to clean drainage channels to decrease the chance of the

region flooding (Clermont, 2011). Unfortunately there are few examples of such work, and the
overwhelming assumption was made and acted upon that external rather than internal         skills and

resources were best. There were documented cases of local      doctors and nurses being ignored in

their own medical    centers by international medical teams, transforming the relief effort into a

skewed and primarily externally driven effort (Clermont, 2011).



Urban centers are engines of growth, and as such      are both more (economically) vulnerable to
shocks but also show great     potential and promise for recovery. Cities are characterized by a

concentration  of skilled people and services but as mentioned, these were often overlooked in

Haiti's relief and recovery operations with the perception   that these types of skills and services

were not available.   Yet  street markets  were operating within days of the earthquake.      Water

vendors, for example could not compete with free water provided by external agencies,      nor could

Haitian-based private sector suppliers compete with free imported    bulk goods from aid agencies.
Despite the fact that there is an unavoidable issue of bottlenecks and delays when relying upon or

partnering with  local markets and in-country private sector importers, much more could have

been done to analyze and make use of local    procurement capacities in Port-au-Prince (Clermont,

2011). By partnering with and using the Haitian market place, private sector development and

small and medium enterprises are supported, and benefits such as job creation, efficiency, tax

revenues and capacity are strengthened and generated (Clermont, 2011).


Although not exclusively an issue of urban recovery, exit strategies were not clarified nor

communicated among, within or outside of agencies. In contrast to a rural setting,      the complex

realitiesof urban  recovery  might  have  further complicated agencies' ability to set and measure

success (Clermont, 2011).     By establishing and communicating both the scope and scale of

involvement, and by partnering with local organizations, international agencies would have been
better equipped to measure and
                                  examine short-term as opposed to long-term     goals. In addition,
rather than have external agencies play out an elongated relief effort that created       unhealthy

dependence, the former could have used exit strategies to first focus on and build local    capacity

and to ultimately transition relief and recovery efforts to state and local agencies.







                                                                                                  14
Kira Intrator




Summary

While the segment on Haiti's disaster   relief coordination served to provide a glimpse into the

errors committed with and through the    internal management and coordination of humanitarian

agencies (e.g. the collapse of the cluster system and weak leadership), the urban setting of Haiti's
January 2010 earthquake provided a deeper dive into the urban complexity and context of the

errors committed in relief and recovery efforts. Moreover, the history of meager integration

between international and local NGOs as well as the regular circumvention of the state by

international NGOs foreshadowed the ineffective coordination after the earthquake struck in

January 2010. Weak coordination and communication         between all actors involved (between
affected communities, local and internationalagencies, and government) was further exacerbated

by the failure of the cluster system to streamline efforts or to oversethe management of inter-

agency coordination    in a timely  manner. Limited engagement      with communities, and the

noticeable absence of building upon existing human and social capital helped only to delay

recovery and increase the affected communities' dependency upon external aid.




Information Management


Because of the major hurdles external humanitarian  actors faced in informationmanagement,   and

communication within the cluster system,   we turn our attention within, to the vital role of the
affected community as a relief agent. According to the USAID's Office for Foreign Disaster

Assistance's  (OFDA) annual report, OFDA staff repeatedly stated that disaster-affected

individuals, not the international community, are the first responders (OFDA, 2009). In the same

vein, ALNAP's (Active Learning Network for Accountability and Performance in Humanitarian

Action) head  of research and development,  Ben Ramalingam observed    that the "majority of life-

saving work in any disaster is done by   the populations themselves... Agencies must give good
information to communities so they can plan their own recovery from the start" (IRIN, January

2010). Therefore one of the key components to Haiti's recovery and its capacity to build

resilience to future hazards and shocks is through the strengthening of its human and social

capital. Agencies that were able to recognize, use, and build these forms of capital tended to

engender quick steps towards recovery (Clermont et al., 2011).


Humanitarian organizations have reaffirmed a central lesson, now a tenet, after every large-scale

disaster: that good communication and information management         is critical to effective and


                                                                                              15
Kira Intrator



efficient humanitarian logistics and coordination (IFRC, 2000 & Harvard Humanitarian Initiative,

HHI, 2010). Filling the information chasm         -- collecting data and knowledge of the damage,
                                                3
distilling critical information out of chaos,      -- is a critical need after a major disaster strikes

(ICRAM, 2010).


From    a disaster relief information       management vantage point, the case of Haiti was

groundbreaking. It was the first time that social media and mobile technology entered into the

humanitarian   disaster relief system at such an intense level and   in such high volume (HHI, 2010).

However, it is likewise important to note that according to the 2011 report 'Lessons from Haiti'

generated by Communicating with Disaster Affected Communities (CDAC) (CDAC, 2011) that

there are limitations in claiming Haiti's 'new media' experience        a complete success story. The

report underscores that in Haiti there was a lack of knowledge on how to integrate the new

technologies into existing humanitarian aid structures and organizations, in addition to the

absence of connections, common language, and operating procedures between international

agencies, new communities of volunteer technologists, and large government.


Despite issues of limited inter-operability and limited coordination between technologists (and

their emerging technology),     and with disaster relief organizations, what is indisputable is that

massive amounts    of information were generated and mined from the disaster-affected community

and global volunteers (HHI, 2010). The simultaneous explosion of communications between

citizen and humanitarian aid workers and the showcasing of new media applications in Haiti was

termed a "real world laboratory" (Nelson, 2011). Active information-seeking               behavior from

Haitian citizens (instead of being relegated to the role of recipients of one-way communication)

through mobile phones, social media, and social-media driven radio-show programs increasingly

became the norm rather than the exception. According to the CDAC report (2011) the most

notable innovations to arise from Haiti were "the translation of crowdsourced data to actionable

information; the use of SMS message broadcasting in a crisis; and crowdsourcing of open maps

for humanitarian application." Such examples include Ushahidi or Digicel's '4636' program.

Digicel, one of Haiti's leading telecom companies, launched free SMS texts in support of relief

efforts, enabling users to send free messages to information centers regarding their emergency

needs or to report missing persons, which in turn produced quasi real-time citizen-based reports.


IThe natureofcommunications needsdiffer atdifferent stagesof adisaster;likewise thecontribution of mobile technology (and other
forms of communication) varies correspondingly. (The Role of'lobilessandEmergencies,2005, GSM Association)
 Ushahidi is asoftware platform that was created asa result of thecontestedesidential election. It can be adaptedand
used for many purposes:racking of elections, outbreaks of violence, and most markedlyg Haiti2010 earthquake.
According to its website (http://wwxs.ushahidi.com/)an open source project which allows users to crowdsource
information to besentvia mobile."


                                                                                                        16
Kira Intrator

































Figure 3: CDACReport,   2011. Comms. Ecosystem  in Haiti


In  brief, the  Haitian  population  did  not play  the  role of silent  (or silenced)  recipient  and

beneficiary;  through  start-ups such as Digicel's 4636  program,  and  Ushahidi,  they had  increased

voice  and  visibility.oreover,   populations affected by natural  disasterand  the mobilized  masses

of global  volunteers  willonly continue  to grow  exponentially  in volume  and.in their potential for

change   and impact.



 1.2Theoretical Trends & Disaster ReliefManagement
                             subfields that will be covered   in the latterhalf of this paper,  and to
 To  be able to  situate the
 contextualize the application  of and role technology   (and hence  MMER)     plays within  it,a brief

 theoretical history and  overview  of the three  dominant  trends  in disaster management    research

 willbe  given. The  threetheoretical branches  of disastermanagement    that will be covered  willbe:

 the US-based    functionalist  approach,   the social  constructionism    (or  human    adjustment)

 perspective, and  finallythe interpretationthat modernity    and technology   are  contributing  risk
                             will pause   at Hewitt's  analysis  of  the  dangers  of modernity    and
 factors. Specifically,  we





                                                                                                    17
KiraIntrator


technology   and his critique of  the dominant   technocratic approach   of disaster management     so as

to be able to place the role of technology   within an established  theoretical branch.



Major  TheoreticalTrends ofDisaster  ManagementResearch
Over  the last three decades  there has  been much   dispute over both  the characteristics that defined

a disaster, and  what made up    (or should constitute)  the subject matter   of disaster relief research

(Hewitt,  1983; White,    1994) According     to Tierney's   five-year national assessment    of natural

hazards research  (Tierney,  2011), the  most cited definition  in thesocial sciences  is that developed

by Fritz - a disaster sociologist - who  defined disaster  as:

         An event,oncentratednime and space, which a society, relatively-sufficientdivision a
         society,dergoes severenger and incurschlosses tos members andysical appurtenances
         the social structuresruptedd the fulfillmentll ore of the essentialtionsf the society
         prevented.Fritz, p. 655,)

Fritz' definition underscores   the disaster event and  its impact upon  a social structure  (rather than

focusing  on the   underlying  social or  environmental    origins of the disaster)  and  alludes to  the

influence  of a functionalist    or systems   perspective   to disaster research.  A functionalist    and

systems-perspective    is one of the  classical approaches   in the definition  and  study of  disasters.

Centered   on an 'event   based' approach,   disasters are seen  as discrete events;  the source of the

disaster is understood   to be  external rather  than internal, and the interest  and actions  taken are
focused upon   practical matters  in the immediate   impact  of the event,rather than  the social origins

of a disaster  (Barton,  1969). Functionalism      had, and continues   to have a   major influence    on

North American      disaster research and   studies. This  is largely  attributed to  the fact that  U.S.

disaster research originated   in World   War II funding   and war-related   projects organized   around

case studies   of disaster events  - leading   to an  event-oriented  and inductive    research  strategy

(Tierney,  2001). Today,    researchers  continue  to define situations  as disasters  according   to the
                                                               overwhelm    the capacity  of the affected
functionalist 'demand-capacity'    model   in which  demands
community    or region.



The social  constructionist   approach   appears to  be orthogonal   to functionalism.  Constructionists

such  as Stallings  (1995),  Drabek (1986)    and  Kreps (1984),    focus on the social   processes   and

activities that occur in   and around    disasters. Thus, for   constructionists  what  is of  import in

understanding   disasters  are not the physical   effectsof what could    or does  occur, but  rather the
                                                                                      disasters and their
social construction  and  processes  "through  which groups   promote  claims about

  Although  we coverthree  theoreticalapproaches,  thefieldof  disastermanagement   can be simplified and
reduced  to two  major  divergent  methodologies:  that of a sociological versus a  geographical  hazards
approach to natural disaster.



                                                                                                       18
KiraIntrator


consequences."    (Tierney, 2001) However, while      functionalism looks at disasters as discrete

events, and sequesters  nature from the analysis of societal adjustments and definitional processes,

both the social constructivist and functionalist approach  overlook the relationship (or impact) of

man to nature and fail to create competing frameworks     in which vulnerability is imbedded in, or

arises from the affected community or society.


Both the social constructionist  perspective and the functionalist approach were expanded upon

and used    as a foundation for social geographers who promoted the concept of human

incremental   adjustment. The 1970's saw the rise of the Human Ecology or Natural Hazards

research approach led by the social geographers Gilbert White and John Dewey (White, 1994).
This perspective focuses upon the relationship of man to his environment,       and the ecology of

human choice. Vulnerability to hazards is understood to stem from     the human use system, where

humans occupy vulnerable or disaster-prone locations. In addition to cultural or behavioral

adaptation, the natural hazards approach pushes for reduction    activities that include the revision

and implementation     of  land use zoning, building codes and disaster-resilient       construction
practices (Tierney, 2001). Hence vulnerability and risk is understood to be present due to choices

individuals and communities make in inhabiting certain disaster-prone areas, rather than the

source of risk emanating from the community or society itself. In summary, the human

adjustment perspective of Human Ecology resonates       with the constructionist perspective, while

its behavioral science dimension fits more squarely within functionalism.


Technology &Risk

In contrast, European social theorists such as Beck   and Lulhmann introduced a hazard-centered

critique of modernity  in which they argued that vulnerability is accentuated by, and inherent in,
the social  order  of modernization    and a technology-centered     society. Beck contends that

industrialized society has become    a 'risk society' (Beck, 1992) introducing new risks such as

chemical or nuclear threats, or making once calculable risks incalculable and uncontrollable.

Lulhmann (1993) presses on and states that modern society has become      riskier due to the reliance

of its institutions on technology. Lulhmann stresses the inherent risk of technology: instead of
decreasing risk, Lulhmann believes that technology enhances    it, as in the case of technology used

as a safety or control system for other technology. In support of Lulhmann's argument, Tierney

(2001) underscores that the disasters at Chernobyl, Bhopal and the Three Mile Island were not

only failures of technology, but also failures of technology to regulate (technological)risk.





                                                                                                  19
Kira Intrator


While this theoretical vein examines the macro-view of "self-inflicted failures of modernity"

(Hewitt, 1997, p.3), it does not address the role technology has or could play in disaster relief or

recovery efforts. Rather it is Hewitt's (1983) technocratic critique that has the potential to more

adequately address the role that technology plays in disaster recovery theory.



Hewitt mistrusts  the technocratic approach of seismic and natural science     practitioners, which he

believes to be the prevailing and dominant view in hazards research. Defined as an approach that
enables  technical procedures to dominate over other fields, the technocratic view is presented as a

sociocultural construct that  can "easily miss" the sources of social influence over hazards   (Hewitt,

1983).  Hewitt claims that the technocratic approach - which        he also refers to as the 'natural

science-technological   fix'- is one that favors (e.g.,   through funding) fields such as physical

science, technology and engineering.    Therefore emphasis is placed on areas such as: monitoring

and understanding geophysical processes, physical planning to contain the hazard according to

geophysical patterns, and emergency management plans developed through geophysical analyses.

This focus results in what Hewitt believes to be an approach which quarantines the disaster in

thought and practice in a space outside of 'everyday responsibility' (Hewitt, 1983). Finally,
Hewitt interprets  the dominant technocratic view through a Weberian lens - that the technocratic

view is an expression of the way institutions route their resources into a particular style of work

and practice (Hewitt, 1983).



In response to this one-sided critique of technocratic approaches and the risk of technology, is the

emergence of promising and life-saving technologies in the preparation, coordination, response

and recovery stages of disaster management (for a complete overview of technology innovations

in disaster management see 'New Technologies, 2009'). These technologies gather data and
information from numerous sources, and are not only accessible to humanitarian aid workers and

research branches, but to the affected communities themselves. For example, with respect to

disaster relief preparation and coordination, the Global Alert and Coordination System (GDACS)

from the European Commission's Joint Research Center synthesize existing disaster information

management     systems. GDACS not only sends real-time          alerts on natural disasters but also

integrates news from over one thousand news          feeds, sets up an online discussion forum for

disaster responders,   and bases its mapping     system through the incorporation      of post-disaster

satellite imagery (New Technologies, 2009). Moreover, Hewitt emphasizes that technology
overlooks
           the social dimensions of disasters    in addition to issues of social inequality. However,

 Ittp://w\\gdacs.org.



                                                                                                     20
Kira Intrator



Hewitt's  analysis does not include current communications and community-centered technologies

that support recovery. An example of     technology that can be used by responders and the affected
                                                                                                       7
community     alike  during the response    and recovery-phase of a disaster is Frontline SMS           .

Frontline SMS uses a free software platform, and is essentially a flexible and scalable

communications hub that allows users to send text messages to groups of people through their

mobile phones or computers. It allows for a two-way communication                   between groups of
individuals, or a central hub and a group. It can therefore be used for a variety of needs such as

emergency alerts (catered by region, or camps) or to conduct public surveys. Finally, an example

of the use of technology post-disaster that counters Hewitt's blanket statement and fear regarding

technology in the context of disaster management, are those technologies that aid          recovery and

economic growth such as mobile           phone   applications like   Konbit  8 in Haiti or Souktel's    9

'JobMatch' that connect individuals     to job opportunities through   textmessaging. With respect     to

MMER, it fits within the recovery      phase to promote a two-way communication system between

the affected individual seeking medical advice and a medical practitioner, providing the caller

with both guidance and medical advice.



Unlike Hewitt's rejection of Weberian dominance, these technologies give voice and the ability to

mobilize, organize and in some cases gain access to employment for victims of the disaster.
Given that these technology innovations are still emerging and represent a nascent yet fast-

growing field within disaster management, they have yet to gain       a theoretical or conceptual label.

It is time to rediscover and  re-write a critical literature and theory on the role technology plays in

disaster relief and in enhancing human communication in crisis contexts. This is not to say that

technology is without its own complexities and drawbacks, but as illustrated with current and

concrete examples, it has shown that as a tool of recovery placed in the             hands   of affected

communities and relief agents, it holds great promise. We are in an era of engagement with

technology and a new critique of these emerging social and mobile technologies must                   be

established.



Having briefly reviewed key theoretical perspectives to disaster management in the past, we turn

to the present, where we find the current disaster management field to be multidisciplinary in

nature, incorporating    functionalist and social science perspectives,       while emphasizing and

expanding upon the concept of 'vulnerability' (Wisner, 2001).

7http://\x\\w-.frontliniesms.coi.
8http://ww.konbitforhaiti.org/
"http://w\w.souktcl.org.



                                                                                                      21
Kira Inrator




This chapter will close with a contemporary view of disaster management, so as to understand

how vulnerability and  risk is conceptualized currently. Furthermore we will  be introduced to the

four main stages -or segments- that comprises current disaster management strategies through the

disaster management   cycle. However, any discussion regarding disaster   relief management must

also be met with the definition of key concepts within the disaster management field: the
interplay between risk, hazard and vulnerability.



Current Perspectives: Risk, Hazard & Vulnerability


The goal of disaster relief research and management is minimizing and managing risk and
reducing the impact of a natural disaster event.     Within the disaster management discourse,

disaster risk is described as a function of hazard impact and vulnerability (and sometimes

capacity). The most commonly applied pseudo-equation to model disaster risk is:

                       Risk = Hazard * Vulnerability. (Wisner et al., 2004)

Disaster management thus focuses on reducing the impact of a disaster event by decreasing

vulnerability and increasing resilience or capacity. According to Wisner, a disaster occurs "when
a significant number of vulnerable people experience a hazard and suffer severe damage and/or

disruption of their livelihood system in such a way that recovery is unlikely without external aid."

(Wisner  et al., 2004). In both Fritz and Wisner's definition, the idea that the affected society or

community is overwhelmed and unable to cope independently with the changes induced by the

hazard event remains, however while Fritz focuses on the 'isolation' of the event, Wisner

emphasizes the embedded (and likely systemic or longer-term) role that vulnerability plays in the
creation and impact of a disaster.



The term 'risk' refers to the impact (or potential impact) of the natural hazard iwhich the degree

of vulnerability  of the community is amplified by the        hazard impact. Wisner approaches

vulnerability through a socio-economic      and political lens, and defines vulnerability as the

capacity of an individual or group to anticipate, cope and recover from the impact of a natural
hazard (Wisner et al., 2004). Vulnerability has been analyzed and identified by social scientists

throughout the disaster management cycle (see Figure 5) and includes non-structural            and

structural components (e.g., structural conditions, socio-economic vulnerability, or hazard risk

perception). One of the most established and widely used models that capture this concept and the

views of social scientists is the 'Pressurend Release' (PAR) model (see Figure   4).





                                                                                                 22
Kira Intrator




                  THE PROGRESSION OF VULNERABILITY

        1                                                          3


 ROOT CAUSES                DYNAMIC PRESSURES            UNSAFE CONDITIONS                DISASTER                   HAZARDS





                                Lack of                      Physical
                                -Localistitudons             Environment
                                -Traning                     -Dangerous lcadons                                     Earthquake
   Lited  Access                 Appropriatsellts            -Uroatectedbudings
    -Pow                        -Prossfreedomenfts            &htrastructure                                        High Winds
    -Structures                 -Ethicaetandiards                                                                    (Cyclone/
    Resources                     npubliclife                -Licodsonoat risk                                       H-urricane/
                                                             -LOWmconwleevels                                        Typhoon)

                                                                                                                     Flooding
                                Macro-forces                 SocialRelations
                                - apidpopulatiocnhtange      -Lackoflocalfritutuons                                  Volcanic
   Ideologies                   - aplourberisation                                                                   Eruption
    Pollticaslystems            -SArmexpendterrpay           Public Actions&
    Economicsystems              schedles                    Institutions                                             Drought
                                 Deforestaion                -Lackofdisaster
                                 Oec*,leinsoil                                                                     Virus& Pests
                                 productivity                -Prevalencof
                                                              endemidcisease





  Figure 4: Pressure      & Release Model (Based on Wisner, et al., 2004)




The PAR model (Figure 4) succinctly captures both the social and natural components of hazard


risk and vulnerability, where human vulnerability is connected to the exposure and impact of the


physical hazard. The PAR model illustrates this as a process in which increased pressure (from

root causes through to unsafe conditions) of the various                          dimensions of vulnerability is placed


upon    the central node or 'disaster'. Wisner describes the image as a nutcracker with pressure


arising from both sides: from the elements contributing to the progression of an individual's


vulnerability to the left, through to the impact (and ultimately the                          gravity)    of the hazard on the

right.





Disaster Management Cycle:

While the PAR model captures a perspective of the impact and underlying factors that contribute


to the severity of a given disaster, the disaster management cycle (see Figure 5) captures the


current    management and structure of disaster               reduction and relief efforts.





The organization of disaster management research and activities is based on four established

temporal stages that make             up the hazard management cycle: mitigation, preparedness, response


and recovery (National Governor's Association, 1979; Mileti, 1999 & Tierney, 2001). The first


step in the cycle - hazard mitigation - comprises the processes, actions, or policies taken prior to a

disaster to reduce physical or societal vulnerability (e.g., land-use codes or construction practices





                                                                                                                                   23
KiraIntrator


                                                     that improve the resistance of the building to

                                                     physical    impacts)     to    hazard    exposure.

                                                     Preparedness     refers    to    capacity-building

                                                     activities - which can be applied   to the level of
                 "1           I
                                                     households,      organizational      entities    or

                                                     emergency preparedness units - that contribute
             flitI     tSti':ni'                     to enhancing   readiness in disaster response and

                                                     recovery.    The   actions    taken   during    the

                                                     emergency response phase serve to respond        to

                                                     the immediate needs of the disaster-affected

Figure 5:Disaster Management Cycle(Based     on     population,   and to prevent    additional  loss by
Tierney, 2001 & National Governors Association,
1979)                                               addressing ongoing threats. Activities       in the

                                                    response phase include evacuation, search and

rescue, the provision of emergency medical care, food and shelter.     Finally, post-disaster recovery
includes all processes that help repair, rebuild and restore the affected community, its properties,

public infrastructure and its governmental services and    operations.



As addressed earlier, each of the stages in the disaster management cycle can be assigned to a

different technology usage or innovation. As will be illustrated         in Chapter 2, the nature of

communication needs and hence technologies differ at various stages of disaster. Specifically, the

use of mobile phones in disaster relief will be expanded upon, in addition to the role they play in
crisis communication.


























                                                                                                      24
 Kira Intrator







               2. MOBILE PHONE           USE AND CRISIS COMMUNICATION


 2.1 Mobile Phones and Disaster Relief

The great   advances in communications technology (the number       of new technologies, the spread,

range and   mobility of functions available) has had a tremendous       effect on both mobile phone

penetration  and the use of social media and networking       sites, crowdsourcing websites, and the

general way in which information is exchanged        and delivered (ICRAM, 2010).       For example,

Facebook saw a 153% increase in unique       visitors from June 2007 to June 2008 and an additional

surge of 157%(of 208 million visitors) in    June 2009 (Schonfeld, 2009). Dramatic communication

advances    provide   a potential   and opportunity     for humanitarian    agencies   to effectively
communicate      with communities     affected
                                                 by disasters   and allow these individuals        and
communities to communicate with each      other and with the external world (ICRAM,      2010). These

improved communications systems        not only help individuals prepare for   disaster, but can also

improve the response    and recovery. However three challenges remain and     have yet to be realized

in the disaster relief communications  sector:


     I.  With unregulated information flow there is a need     for accuracy and an authentication   of
         information (the issue of hoaxers in communication, or the example of "Twitter in Tehran" in
         which the re-tweets were inaccurate and misleading).

     2.  Social context within which the communicationtool is used - information will only be used if it is
         trusted.
     3.  The flow of information must be two-way -   from the outside world to communities affected by
         disaster and from the humanitarian organizationseeking to help the members of the communities.
         (ICRAM, 2010)


Moreover,   the mobile divide is narrowing. According      to the International Telecommunications
Union (ITU) by the end of 2008 subscriptions
                                                topped 4 billion, or 61 mobile phones for every   100
individuals (ITU, 2009). The growth      of the use of mobile phones "has been one
                                                                                         of the most
remarkable features   in the last decade" (ICRAM, p.5, 2010).


2.2 The Useand Roleof Information   in DisasterResponse

Similar  to the stages of the disaster management    cycle, (mitigation, preparedness,  response  and

recovery)  are the generalized  phases of communication     and communication    needs in the use of

mobile phones according to Coyle (2005):        from early warnings, disaster impact, immediate

aftermath  through  to recovery  and  rebuilding. According   to Coyle's  research, there are various

extents  (albeitgeneralized)  to which people    need to communicate     according  to the unfolding




                                                                                                   25
KiraIntrator



                                                                                 disaster (Figure 6 and

                                                                                 7).



                                                                                 As illustrated in Figure

                        ~0                                                       6,communicatio       nneeds

                                                                                 and     types     can    be

                                                                                 clustered into four time

                                                                                 periods. First are early

                                                                                 warning systems set a

                                                                                 few days, or even hours

                                                                                 prior   to   the   disaster

                                                                                  impact.   This   form   of

                                                                                 mobile    communication
Figure 6: Communication    needs at different phases of disaster.Adopted
from  Coyle, 2005                                                              is based  primarily  on  one-
                                                                               way          forms         of

                                                                    campaigns)    to  maximize     reach  in
communication      and   broadcasts   (e.g., public   information
                                     second   grouping   is that established  and  activated  upon   impact
preparation   for the impact.   The
       a  range  of 0-12   hours  after impact).  The   technologies   used  during  this  phase  are  often
(with
satellite-based   resilient emergency      communications     (see  Figure    7  for specific   examples);

concurrently    it is in this phase   that  all forms   of  communications     are likely   to be severely

backlogged     and  impaired.   The   communication      need   swiftly  shifts  away    from   information

campaigns    (from  stage  one) toward   life-saving  emergency   responses.   As mobile    networks  begin

to recover  and satellite connection   start to become   available to relief workers   in stage three or the

 'immediate   aftermath'  phase   (12 hours  to 3  days after  impact)  decentralized   two-way    forms  of

communication      are most  prevalent  and  needed   for the purposes   of rapid  recovery,  the  abilityto

 locate family  and   friends, and  for exchanges    of  news   and  timely  updates   (Coyle,  2005).   The

 fourth and final  stage -  that of recovery   and  rebuilding  - (which   startsas of the  third day post-

 impact),  is the continued   widespread    dependence    of affected  communities,    agencies   and  relief

 workers   upon   mobile   phones   for  dispersed   two-way   communication      in order   to gather   and

 exchange   information  for co-ordination   and recovery.



 Given  its unique  role in allowing   for a decentralized   flow  of communication,     the use of  mobile

 phones  before,  during  or after anatural  disaster, likewise  correspond  to the communication     needs

 at each  stage.  Coyle,  (2005)   breaks   this down   into  the aforementioned     communication      need



                                                                                                          26
Kira Intrator




categories,   and groups the formats needed at each phase (Figure 7).



In brief, while early      warning requires more of a one-way form of communication (of                        one to


many), the reconstruction phase - the phase within which MMER functions                         - demands a two-

way exchange of information, where mobiles provide a unique advantage                         over other forms of

information channels. This advantage is due not only to the fact
                                                                                  that mobiles can disperse and

disseminate information informally and quickly, but also               because they can provide and transmit

the specific needs and demands of affected communities                     to the outside world. Specifically,


MMER not only aids in the decentralization            of medical information from medical expert to caller

-and vise versa- it      also has the potential to capture the information provided by the caller to

ultimately    provide the right resources to the right individuals, in the right locations through
                                                                                                                   the

generation of crisis maps. This advantage is critical; MMER's potential                      to provide the right

resources    to the right place will be covered in greater detail in Chapter Three, in the analysis                 of

medical supply chain management and logistics.








                                    Broadcastoasmany    Emergencyresponse-   Person-to-person    Informationexchange
                                    vulnerabpeopleas    empnasisonlife-saving contact,forswift   andco-ordination;
                                    possibltirnely,     intra-operable,      exchangeofnewsand   dispersed2-way
                                    one-wayinformation  resilientemergency   developmentsrapid   communicationforas

                                                        communications.      recoveryof2-way     manyofthoseaffectdd
                                                        PublicdemaWdfor      communications      aspossible
                                                        news offriendstfamly amongstthosaffected
                                                                             and fam~y. fniends


                                    Many,tomaximise     Satellitemoresient.  Mobileasnetwork     Mobile(especiafor
                                    reachbroadcast      snortterm,if         recover(especialy   developincountries)
                                    technologiemaybe    emergencyservices      forveloping
                                    supplementebywet    haveaccessto.t       countries).atelite
                                    backinuppnorpubc    Alformsof           forrelif orkers,

                                    nfonationcampaigns  communications       if available.
                                                        avstabletopublicl-kely
                                                        tobe impaired


                                         NO:            OFTEN:
                                                                            YES.                 YES:
                                    One amongm stany    Inter-operaforuse   Widespreadmeansof    Widespreadmeansof
                                                        by differetmergency decentralised-,way   decentralis2-way
                                                        service(although    communication,       communicatioof
                                                        maybedamagedin      Networkrecoveryften needsV . ery
                                                        extremectcumstances) after1-2dayseven    importanindeveloping

                                                        Congestion          when damage          countriesithittle
                                                        management required sustained            fixed-lialternative.
                                                        tobalanccompeting
                                                        equirmnSMS
                                                        moreeffective


Figure 7: Communication      Needs  by Disaster Phase. From Coyle, 2005







                                                                                                                   27
Kira Intrator





The Role of T61dcoms   Sans Frontieres and the Speed of Mobile  Network Repair


Mobile networks are a critical part of the infrastructure that must be repaired and restored as

quickly as possible by the government and operators involved post-disaster. Unlike other means

of communication, such as fixed-line connections, the recovery time (and ease) of repairing
mobile networks compared to fixed wireless base stations is much faster. Moreover, new mobile

networks can be set up relatively quickly by emergency response teams in which there were no

existing mobile networks prior through the installation of temporary networks (Coyle, 2005). The

speed and ease of restoration and set-up of       cellular networks provides yet another strong

advantage for the use of mobile phones post-disaster.


More specifically, in developing countries in which mobile phone penetration and use has proven

to be center-stage in communications       infrastructure, organizations such as T616coms Sans

Frontieres (TSF) are vital in the international disaster relief response effort. Since998 TSF has

been a central emergency communications support for almost every humanitarian response to
natural disaster (ICRAM, 2010). This vital role is further illustrated in TSF's status with respect

to the United Nations and other key humanitarian agencies. It became the first NGO partner for

the United Nation's Office for Coordinated Humanitarian Affairs and the United Nations

Children's Fund in 2006. It is a partner of       the European Commission's      humanitarian aid

department and works alongside the United Nations Disaster Assessment and Coordination team
in early needs assessments  post-disaster. TSF has three bases: in France, Thailand andNicaragua,

and can normally reach an emergency area in 24 hours, but can take up to 48 hours to deploy

(TSF, 2012).



In summary, according to    the findings of the GSM Association report, The Role of Mobiles in
Disasters and Emergencies, (Coyle, 2005) which assessed the use and impact of mobile phones in

large-scale disasters, the use of mobile phones in disaster management during the Indian Ocean

tsunami in 2004, Hurricane Katrina in   2005, and in the January and February 2010 disasters   that

hit Haiti and Chile respectively, was revealed  to be critical. The UN  Foundation and Vodafone

Foundation's  report (New Technologies,    2009) highlighted through  a series of case studies the
effectiveness of mobile phone technologies in disaster alert systems, preparedness,  response, and

recovery. Moreover, the range of applications of mobile phones post-disaster was impressive. The

mobile phone   was not only used  as a critical (andften times sole) communication tool,   but was




                                                                                                28
Kira Intrator



also leveraged and used as a major fundraising, data collection, and disease surveillance tool. The

latter is an example of 'mHealth', or a mobile health technology applied in disaster relief - a term
and subject that will be expanded upon in Chapter Four. For example, a mobile phone disease

surveillance   study examined the effectiveness of mobile phones after the 2008 Sichuan

earthquake in China, in which mobile phones were distributed to 495 local health       agencies. Due

to high reporting by the agencies, the outcome of this study was the identification of 38 infectious

diseases. (Yang, et al., 2009)



2.3CrisisCommunication

It is important to stress that mobile phones are a tool for communication and consequently of

crisis communication    during and after the onset of a natural disaster. Therefore, the process  and

social dimensions of communication need       to be addressed,  alongside the technical dimensions.
According   to Mileti & Sorenson (1990) crisis communication is a four-stage process    that involves

hearing, understanding, believing, confirming and responding. Yet Mileti and Sorenson       present a

rather linear and culturally void progression that is more likely to be present in non-crisis

situations, as opposed to crisis situations in which the communication and interpretive process is

fragmented, augmented,    attenuated or short-circuited. The social amplification of risk framework

(SARF) created     by Clark University and Decision Research academics is an integrative
theoretical framework    thatcaptures both risk perception and risk communication, and serves to

describe "the various dynamic social pressures underlying risk perception and response" (The

Social Amplification of Risk, 2003, p. 3) This framework points to the impact of social,

institutional, cultural and psychological processes that either heighten or diminish both individual

and social perceptions of risk.


The hypothesis    and starting point of the model is that the disaster or 'risk event' (that include

either actual or hypothesized incidents) could be made "largely irrelevant or localized in their

impact unless human beings observe and communicate them to others" (Social Amplification of

Risk, 2003, p.13). Rather than simply the experience of physical harm, it is the communication

process (that can be portrayed through various images, signs and symbols), and the subsequent

interpretations of risk (that interact with a range of cultural, social, psychological aninstitutional
processes) that lie at the heart of  the social amplification of risk framework. These stages or

transformations of communication     and interpretation either amplify or attenuate perceptions    of

risk and its manageability for groups and individuals. For example,          'individual stations of

amplification' (i.e., the dynamics and individual processing of risk) are influenced by prior


                                                                                                   29
KiraIntrator



attitudes, blame, risk heuristics, and trust in addition to whether the individual is a member of a

social or cultural group that "codetermine the social processing of risk" (Social Amplification,

2003). Moreover, the amplification or diminution of risk perception in these social units or 'social

stations of amplification' are in turn influenced by culture, institutional structures, and rules or
role expectations pertaining to that group and individual.



More specifically, it is the decoding process that determines the receiver's selection of critical

information (Renn, et al., 1992). According to Renn, et al., (1992) the process of an individuals'

perception of information includes the decoding of signals, where the individual deciphers the

meaning   of the signals in their environment (media or other) in addition to picking up cues to
ascribe credibility to the information or source of information being provided. Next, the receiver

draws inferences based on these signals, such as judging the intention and seriousness of the

information and its sources,     followed by the evaluation of the message         (its importance,

persuasiveness, and effect on the receiver's personal    life). Once the message is evaluated, the

individual forms specific  beliefs, or rationalizes their belief system based on the subject of the

message and its   alignment with their previously held beliefs (e.g., shifting beliefs about the
subject of the message, or reinterpreting the belief to minimize cognitive dissonance). The final

step is forming the intention to take corresponding action. (Renn, et al., 1992)



In the case of MMER,     not only must  a caller or user of the system understand   and decode the

message and information being imparted by the health practitioner, but    they must also infer and

evaluate the importance of the medical    advice being provided. Given that MMER is a two-way
rather than a one-way form of communication the decoding       and evaluative stages are supported

and ameliorated  due to the fact that a dialogue between caller and medical practitioner can occur,

in which the caller can pose  clarifying questions. Furthermore, due to the fact that the individual

is initiatingthe call and making a conscious      decision  to use MMER, and that the medical

information and guidance provided is catered to the caller's expressed needs, the evaluation of the

message - and the rating of the importance and pertinence of the information provided        for the
caller - is further enhanced. However,
                                       during the decoding process when individuals 'decipher the
message' and assign or attribute credibility to the subject and source of the information what

matters is not just the clarity of the message, but the source of the provision of the message, the

reputation of the source (or provider), and the accuracy of past messages. Hence, the level of

professionalism and the   type of information provided   by MMER responders      will be of upmost

import for the perception and application of the message, and how that information is utilized and



                                                                                                 30
Kira Intrator


acted upon by the caller. Therefore if MMER were to be imbedded and institutionalized within an

existing organization (such as the IFRC, or the government's Ministry of Health) maintaining and

enhancing the reputation of both parties in the aftermath of the disaster event would be critical.



According to Marincioni's (2007) study of ninety-seven US and Italian emergency management
agencies' use and implementation of IT in their communication systems, one of the most

important determinants of effectiveness of the technology was the social and cultural adaptation

of the technology to its end user or target community, as well as its ability to garner feedback

from its end-user. Due to the complex cultural, institutional, and social dimensions mentioned in

the framework    above, and because human behavior is dependent       on "demographic, cultural,
economic and psychological factors" (Rodriquez et al., 2007), a field-based survey based on

MMER's services will need to be carried out in Haiti to gather feedback from a sample of

potential future MMER users (see Chapter Seven for details).



Crisis Communication    in Haiti
On the case of crisis communication in Haiti, Wall (2011) eloquently states, "while methods may

be highly technical, communication as a process is deeply rooted in local culture." Using

examples such as 'Noula' a Creole-based live broadcasting Haitian radio station that utilized

Facebook, phone-ins (rather   than SMS-based communication) and on-the-ground       reporting as a

means to reunify lost families and friends post-disaster, Wall underscores the fact that for a
communication system to deliver it must "engage the population and their technical capacity as

equal partners" (Wall, 2011). It was also noted by Noula staff that there were basic errors (e.g.,

duplication or typing errors) in the UN data's list of camps because Noula staff "knew the

places." (Wall, 2011) Such examples point to the fact that residents and survivors have

tremendous knowledge of and persistent access to local information on the ground.


An interesting example provided by Wall (2011) in Haiti's disaster relief communications was

the creation of an Information Line by the International Federation for the Red Cross' (IFRC).

This Information Line provided advice on cholera and the hurricane response, receiving over

130,000  calls during the cholera epidemic and around 400,000  regarding and during the hurricane
season (Wall, 2011).   In addition, according to an interview conducted   with Dr. Nigel Snoad -

Google's Director of Disaster Management      Technology - (June 2011, New York) in a survey

collecting feedback from Haitians on NGO services        provided, the IFRC's information line

received one of the highest satisfaction ratings by Haitians affected by the disaster. Three  key



                                                                                                31
Kira Intrator



points emerge   from Wall's   research: that communities   and  end-users  must be  active  participants

in the communication     process, that affected end-users  and community     members    likely have  the

most valuable   and detailed  on-the-ground    information,  and  that the IFRC's   information  phone

line was revealed  to be one  of the most used and highly  ranked  services by its users.


When applying     this to MMER we       see that MMER      is a cross between     a medical help    and

information line,   and moreover that the     information provided    by the caller is utilized:   it is

captured and   a crisis map that indicates the medical need or ailment reported   is generated. This  in

turn provides   humanitarian   organizations  and disaster relief  agencies with user-generated     data

that can help  organizations  better serve the individuals  and their communities    by supplying   and

providing  them with the  targeted medical  supplies reported, for that given location.



                                                                                Finally,          when

                       Masloxw'sHicrarchy  of Nceds&                            applying   the concept
                          NlobjleApplication Design
                                                                                of           Maslow's
                                                        IA-Iow'..hie~rarchot    hierarchy
                                                       needs-A poweorfumlodol              of  needs  to
                                                       engage determin waat
                                                       mCaningfl conium<r       different    types    of

                                                                                mobile      application
                                                                                designs (see  Figure 8)

                                                                                we appreciate    that  a

                                                                                design system     based

                                                                                on   need indicates    -

                                                                                especially  in the case

                                                                                of       the       most
                                                   SowcEe%FaePrwr  p112,2010                   n ed
                                                 P"ofom        W 20 I  S   2006 foundational   needs-

                                                                                what will    take hold
Figure 8: Mobile Design based on Maslow's Hierarchy
                                                                                and       be       most

meaningful   to the consumer   base and user   (Fogg, 2010). Moreover    we see that  MMER fits into

the  first foundational   tier of basic   needs: in this case    medical needs,    health and safety.













                                                                                                      32
Kira Intrator





                       3. EMERGENCY        MEDICINE       & LOGISTICS

In order  to understand
                         the role that health care support, and medical  emergency   management
plays in disaster relief and recovery efforts, itessential to provide a definition and overview of

the process of disaster relief logistics with respecto the medical supply chain. First, I establish

the context of health threats post-disasterand the  correlationbetween   disaster and disease (see

Figure 9). To do this, a snapshot  of the disaster relief medical supply chain through theroles of

the assessment,   distribution, and selection of medical   goods.  Finally, I conclude   with the
challenges and obstacles  faced in medical logistics due to the introductioof counterfeit medical

goods   and inaccurate  assessments.  These  challenges  will thus establish  the foundation  and

justificationfor MMER's    crisis mapping application, which  could help to ease medical logistic

strains post-disasterby decreasing inefficienciesin the assessment of medical supply needs.


                                  Table1.1Short-termeffcIt ofmajord~aaers



                                  MFin                                 U.,,y      MI,.






              p1en         i aray    w          locic   'sliial      utand otonal       c
       Figure9:  ea   thffes    ohtsaster.From   HOs 2003ltil


             os-iatrMeia   Fu,jr  ed    t  1.                     1ea   t






      Figure 9: Health EffectsPost-DisasteFromWHO,2003
    fute ehned    the chaotic context o  thIiatrrle         fot     onutdi        at.Imiti



3.1 GeneralPost-Disaster MedicalNeeds

The pressure  placed on the already weakened Republic's    logistical and organizationalcapacity,

further enhanced the chaotic context of the disaster-reliefefforts conducted in Haiti. I maintain
that logisticastress is generally felt with more
                                                intensityin the health sector,where  shortages of
supplies or faults in the flow of goodshave fatal ramifications. As illustratin the case of Haiti,

the actors involved in the environment of humanitarian relief  range from military forces, donor


                                                                                               33
Kira Intrator


agencies, international non-governmental    organizations to the national (and local) government.   In

addition  to the complications   of collaborating and  coordinating  with  such disparate  actors,  as

indicated in Haiti's coordination  crisis, ishe issue that humanitarian  personnel  lack the  training

in logistics,stock-control procedures   and medical  supply  chain management    (Boulet-Desbareau,

2011  & Pan  American   Health Organization   - PAHO,  2001).



There  is a general correlation between   the type of disaster impact  and health  threats that ensue
(see Figure  9). Injuries tend  to  occur at  the time  and place  of impact,  while  communicable

diseases  can strike   at different  times  with variable   intensity  due to   lack  of hygiene    or

overcrowded    conditions (PAHO,    2001). Hence,   epidemics  are not often  caused   by the  natural

disaster  itself,but rather    due  to medium-     or  long-term   conditions:   through  population

displacements  (most  often towards  urban areas), degraded  living conditions, lack of basic sanitary

conditions, or environmental   change. Specifically, the most  frequent cause of increased morbidity

is fecal  contamination   of drinking  water  and food.   According   to the  Pan American     Health
               (PAHO)    the risk of epidemic   outbreaks  is thus "proportional  to the density  and
Organization
displacement  of the population"  (PAHO,   2001).


















                                     FI Sp Cycl (ae    o PAO(   &IW     2I0\















Figure 10: SimplifiedHumanitarian  Supply  Cycle (Basedon PAHO &  WHO,2001)


                                                                                                    34
Kira Intralor


3.2 Medical Supply
                    Chain Logistics


Logistics  is commonly understood in the humanitarian field     to be both a physical (material) flow

of goods   as well as an informational flow from raw good through          to the point of delivery.

Logistics thus consists of the end-to-end process    of supply, management of materials or goods,

and their distribution. According    to Nizushima and Thomas (2005, p.60) humanitarian logistics
is the "process of planning, implementing,
                                              and controlling the efficient, cost-effective flow and
storage of goods and materials   as well as related information, from the point of origin to the point

of consumption for the   purpose of meeting the end beneficiary's requirements."


Unlike commercial supply chains,     the humanitarian relief logistics and supply chain system has a

sudden   and often  large demand of unknown quantities     and  types of supply in  an unpredictable

geographic   location. The financial constraints, short lead-time, heavy media scrutiny, high stakes

impact, and assortment of actors involved - in addition          to the likely breakdown of key
infrastructure  -  further adds to the complexity
                                                        of  humanitarian    logistics. Although   the
humanitarian supply cycle diagram (Figure 10) suggests     a linear and sequential process, in reality

the supply-cycle components are often carried out      simultaneously due to complex overlapping

and inter-dependent relationships. However,     for the sake of analysis and of understanding the

import of each step, and how   each thread is reliant upon the next, the supply chain is presented in

its simplified form  (Figure 10). The four distinct components of the emergency medical       supply
chain I will explain  are: (1) anticipatory planning, (2) needs assessment, (3) selection
                                                                                          of medical
goods,  and (4) distribution of supplies.



Anticipatory Planning: Despite, or rather due    to the unpredictability of the type and amount of

supplies needed, or the exact location  of a natural disaster event, it is essential to do anticipatory

planning, complete with stipulations  of roles, responsibilities,and procedures  for implementation.
This key step  is, or should be, the first within the humanitarian supply-chain management
                                                                                             process
(see Figure 10). The preparatory stage consists of the creation      and maintenance of a national

and/or regional emergency plan that, according to PAHO (2001)        contains three critical planning

activities. First, is an assessment of the  vulnerability of key infrastructure, e.g., water-supply

systems, hospitals, national transport infrastructure and highways - with alternative actions to be

taken if these were   to collapse (PAHO, 2001). Second, is an up-to-date stock analysis        of the
location, means (transportation, ports, distribution centers)
                                                                of distribution, and sources  of key
supplies  such as drugs or medical provisions. The third major component of the preparatory

logistics phase is the review and dissemination (and training) of government policies, plans, and


                                                                                                   35
KiraIntrator


preparations  so that other international agencies  and NGO's    are aware  of these, and can  easily

coordinate  reliefeffortsbased  upon these plans.



Needs  Assessment:   A key  element   in emergency   logistics post-disaster is an ongoing   capacity

assessment  to assess  the extent of impact,  as well  as local response  and logistical capacity  on
hand.  This phase  defines the level ofresponse, identifies and allocates resources, and isolates the

most  affected regions  (Log Cluster,  2012).  It is a circularand repetitive  process that  involves

monitoring  and review,  as the needs  of affected communities   change  over time. Failure to assess

the needs  and impact  of a disaster accurately leads to "inadequate  assistance, poor  utilizationof

resources and a  poorly structured response"  (Log Cluster, 2012).



                                SITCTI(ON     )F NDIC   AL. (()(Dws































Figure 11: Process -Selectionof MedicalGoods

Selection: As illustrated in Figure  11,the selection ofmedical  supplies  is ideallycarried out by a

body of  experts that makes  up a 'selection  committee'  (PAHO,   2001). However,   the selection of

medical  supplies  by this appointed and  diverse medical  team  should firstbe  based upon a  list of

existing drugs and   medical  products  compiled   by the affected country's  Ministry  of Health or



                                                                                                   36
 Kira Intrator



 other authorities. Moreover,           the committee should also gather data such as: epidemiological


 assessments,     an analysis of the frequency of illnesses, demographic data, and an understanding of

the availability of supplies       and capacity of the existing/local health system.




Distribution:     As show in Figure 12, there are two main forms of distribution                        systems: indirect

and direct     (PAHO, 2001). The former allows for greater control over the goods                         (and donations)

and requires a strong understanding of the affected population                        (e.g., customs, conditions, and


needs), in addition to the social and physical environment. In the direct form                      of distribution, there

is an obvious           need for experienced and knowledgeable                       logistical, administrative,          and

infrastructural ability. In the case of            an organization that does not have the operational and


logistical ability to handle direct         distribution, indirect distribution is adopted. This involves the

selection of a local      and trusted counterpart who has deep on-the-ground knowledge, who ensures

that the distribution      follows agreed-upon principles          and standards, and has the ability
                                                                                                                to monitor,

document, and control         the supplies in the field (PAHO, 2001).


                        DISTRIBI h ;N 01                         7(DICA    I,-DDSi\STER      RIu I    F


                                                                                               ShouldtidherLtf
                                                                                               Prmcfipk fI I\






                                                                                               *PoorNI trit
                                                                                                    i eI
              CriteriaP  Ire& Rnt   Distribution
                                                                                               hitw donitom
                                                                                                        r an1d
                                                                                               rcopient

         (gWa of selfmAkinry notdependenry)

       " Man   gg &  COMu44  oftEsutibde                                                      "kmt *%Ictdje ;      n---
                                             (c-&,                                             Itai    &f,placn,it,pi si ii
                                                                                               *ni tn'ur   ppuain
                                                                                               *    and doumnt
                                                                                                                 deI  e
                                                                                               registercipimb    fatikth

         instw     mud di*very



                                                                                                  indirct distribution:
                                                                                                consiim  r tbimeL
                                                                                                  trmted counterpant
                                                                                                  *\erce-itpo
                                                                                                            sandards
                                                                                                  pninclpkos
                                                                                                  -ReedarfeedbacL,
                                                                                                  rcteewsreports
   '\\H( )          !ralaru,Oommonti.(       Nl1.996a
  lmaees  sources troi  ctt to Riqht:I iStcunng Phrma 21Cop Blogger3)     Destiym Associates


Figure 12: Process of Medical Distribution





                                                                                                                           37
Kira Intrator


The  distribution of medical  goods  should be  guided by  humanitarian  law and  core humanitarian

principles (e.g.,impartiality,neutrality, and independence)  in addition to abiding by  the SPHERE

guidelines'0: an international standard  of humanitarian  disaster relief thatestablishes a practical

framework    for accountability   which   sets minimum     standards,  definitions, and  measurable

indicators of levels of assistance with respect  to water, food, health care, and  shelter.Therefore
                                                                             but  it should  also be
not  only should   distribution be equitable,  monitored,   and controlled,
proportionate  to the needs    of the  affected  community.    Moreover,   the  security, protection,

labeling, and proper  storage of medical  suppliesare of paramount   importance  due to the potential

for the introduction of counterfeit goods, the mis-appropriation, misuse, or de-activation (e.g.,

through  temperature  changes  or expiration dates) of themedicines  or drugs in question.



3.3 Medical Supply-Chain Challenges

Two major   issues are often overlooked  in terms of medicines:  the introduction of counterfeitsinto

the supply  chain,  and the  lack of medical   perspective or  "de-medicalization"  of humanitarian

efforts. This is in additionto the complications   of ensuring a dynamic,  secure,  and rapid supply

chain  flow among   regions and various  actors,of estimating the right quantity and type of  drug to

be  delivered  at the right   time  and place,   alongside  the challenge   of correct   storage  and

transportation.


According   to the definitionestablished  by the US  Food and Drug   Administration   (FDA,   Section

201), counterfeit drugs are those that are falsely labeled or misrepresented  as being manufactured

or distributed  by  a legitimate   drug manufacturer,    processor,  packer,  or distributor  (FDA).

However,    the World    Health   Organization   (WHO)    defines  counterfeit  medicines   as  those
"deliberately  and fraudulently  mislabeled"  (WHO,    Counterfeit Medicines).   So as to be  able to

draw  the distinction between substandard   drugs and counterfeits, we adopt  the WHO's    definition.

We   define substandard   drugs to  be those that  may suffer  from  poor storage   or transportation

along the  supply chain   and are rendered  impotent, are  unintentionally mis-labeled  (e.g., due to

mistakes  in poor production),  or contain incorrect ratiosor quantities ofingredients  (Bate, 2008).

In contrast, we define counterfeits to be drugs that arewillfully mislabeled.


Likely a  low estimate  given  unknown   and undetected   amounts,  Mackey   (2011)  assesses  that in

2010 alone  counterfeit drugs made   up at least $75 billionin global medicine  market sales. Others

suggest that   on average    25% of the     drug supply   in the developing    world   is counterfeit

 'TheSphereProject. Ilumanitarianrnd MinimumStandards Disastersponse,04. (http://www.sphereproject.org/)


                                                                                                   38
Kira Intrator


(Representative   Buyer, 2007). Bates (2008) points to the "high-reward, low-risk" element of this

illegal activity compounded by a lack of consumer awareness as a reason           for its burgeoning

growth. Moreover,     the spectrum of drugs affected by counterfeits ranges all the way from

lifestyle to lifesaving medicines. Such contamination of the global drug supply chain is         also

present  during times of non-crisis. Specifically, the introduction of counterfeit goods leads     to
antimicrobial resistance (e.g., in the case of malaria and tuberculosis) and death (Mackey, 2011).

What is essential to note is that the prevalence of counterfeits along with     their sale and usage

varies by location, and that developing countries and patient       populations that lack access to

medical supplies are the most at-risk to the purchase and use    of such medicines (Bates, 2008 &

Mackey, 2011). The disproportionate       impact on the poor in developing countries is further
heightened due   to weak import and quality-control regulations (Bates, 2008) in addition to a lack

of infrastructure and technical expertise to test or regulate such activity (Mackey, 2011).



In times of crisis, the complexity and multitude of actors involved    only exacerbate the situation,
by which counterfeiters can more easily "insert
                                                    themselves [in the supply chain] claiming that
they   are wholesalers..  .where   other  legitimate   wholesalers   may trade     unwittingly   with

counterfeiters passing  as wholesalers" (Bates, 2008).



Finally, according to Pierre Boulet-Desbareau, Director of the Logistics Department of Mddecins

Sans Frontieres, the logistical complexity of disaster relief induces        a de-medicalisation of
humanitiarian    action (Boulet-Desbareau,    2011). According     to Boulet-Desbareau      "the aid

provided today during humanitarian      crises is progressively less and less medical," moreover

medical constraints from procurement      to distribution are not readily understood or taken into

consideration  (Boulet-Desbareau, Conference Presentation, 2011).     Even  those  organizations that

do specialize in the medical  field arefinding it increasingly difficult to guarantee the quality and
control  of pharmaceutical  goods along the supply chain. Boulet-Desbareau also points       to strict

import restrictions set by developing countries as an additional obstacle in impeding humanitarian

medical responses. For example, it is almost    impossible for M6decins Sans Fronti~res to import

medical goods to 25 to    30% of countries in which it operates. While these import restrictions

might protect  the financial interests of local or national pharmaceutical production, the quality
control is "rarely aligned to the WHO's international standards" (Boulet-Desbareau, 2011).









                                                                                                   39
Kira Intrator



3.4 MMER:    a CrisisMapping Tool

In response to the   central tenet  noted  above   - that the medical   supply  chain information     chasm in

disaster relief  needs to  be  filled - I plan on building     a data management      system   within MMER

that would crowd      source the data   provided   by its callers, and   in turn generate a crisis   map with

'hot spot'    regions.  This   data  management       system would      capture   the caller's   responses    to


MMER's      automated    routing  queries  regarding   their location, medical     ailment and basic    profile

(such as  age  and gender).   The caller's  profile and  response to   the IVR routing    questions  would   be

then  automatically   transferred  to the medical    responder, and   if the caller approved   it", could also

be  used as a data point   in the crisis map.   The map would      display the location   and ailments    being

reported    by   callers  and   could    inform    entities  such   as the    ministry    of  health,   clinics,

pharmaceutical    companies    or NGOs of:


         (a) Trends in infirmities orseases (or potentialtbreaks) reported bythe callers,
         (b) The need forcertain medicalsupplies orgoods in specificegions,hence enabling the supply
         chain and deliveryof pharmaceutical goods to increasinglyater tothe needs of disaster-

         affected communities.

A major   issue in 'bottom-up'    crowd-sourced     information   (and hence crowd-based      mapping)    is the

provenance    and pedigree   of the  data being  submitted:   for example   in the  misleading Twitter    feeds

re-Tweeted    in the Iranian post-election    protests  in mid-2009,   or 'chain'  text messages    instigating

ethnic  violence   in Kenya's    December    2007   elections  (New   Technologies,    2009).   In the case of

Twitter,  it is hard to track   and identify  the  Twitter user's   identity, and  to verify  the  information

                                                                                                 case, Twitter
provided   in a users 'tweet'.   With respect    to the 2009   Iranian post-election    Twitter

amplified   and   over-represented   the voices   of a young    and affluent   minority   of Iranians,   whose

message    was then re-tweeted    by users  based in  the United States   (New Technologies,      2009).



As Ushahidi's     new program      'Swift River' underscores,     in the case of crowd-sourced       mapping,

there  is a real need to filter, cross-check       and validate all sources     of information     (e.g., SMS,

uploaded    photographs,    etc.) to filter out inaccurate   or deliberately  misleading    information.    The

role and importance     of social  networking   tools in reporting   information   during,  or after a disaster

when   mainstream    media   is lagging  (or is limited in  scope or censored    by  the host government)     is

undeniable.    However,    no  matter how    fast, widespread   and  innovative   a social media technology





11 The caller would be aware   of this functionality and could opt out of his/herinformation  being recorded
beyond  the duration  of the callthrough a menu choice.  Even if  the caller optsout, the system could  record
the medical incident  at coarser resolution to protectthe caller'sprivacy while  not distortingspatial analysis
and frequency   stats.




                                                                                                             40
Kira Intrator



or tool may be, if the crowd-sourced information is not validated in real-time, speed and access,
the primary advantages of this given technology are nullified.



MMER's callers would generate a user-driven crisis     map in which the provenance and pedigree

of the input data was   known and of high quality.    There is a direct incentive   for the caller to
                                                                              given that they will be
provide accurate information   regarding their identity,location and ailment
more accurately   diagnosed, guided and     aided by the medical responder     they are calling.  As

concluded in  the joint paper on New Technologies   in Emergencies and    Conflict (2009, p.37) "itis

the people  concerned who themselves    have the most detailed   and immediate information    needed

for humanitarian agencies to    deliver an effective response."   In addition, MMER     callers have

already made a conscious    decision to call and receivemedical guidance and help,    unlike a social
media user who contributes    to a general crisismap, website or Twitter feed   for a broad range of

reasons.


Summary

This chapter   covered key medical processes      in humanitarian assisted   disaster relief. Having

briefly established the relationship between  epidemics and   disaster impacts, Ishowed that health

risks peak   in the aftermath of a   disaster through population    displacement, overcrowding     or
through  the collapse of sanitation systems and infrastructure. I then covered the essential role,

vulnerability, and risk of disaster-relief logistics andedical supply chains were    then covered. I

highlighted the   distinct medical  preparations and  considerations  needed to accommodate       the

supply  chain through    the phases of anticipatory   planning,  needs assessment,    selection, and

distribution of goods. In addition, I examined additional  challenges to the medical   supply chain:
that of the injection and presence  of counterfeit medical goods, in addition  to import restrictions

and the "de-medicalization    of humanitarian action."  These point   to a critical need not only to

control and monitor medical goods    throughout  thesupply chain through to   their pointof delivery,

but as we highlighted in  the supply-chain  discussion of "needs  assessment" and   "selection," also

to obtain an accurate   and continuous   stream of data to  assess need over   time. To conclude,   I
                                                            crisis mapping technique    could utilize
illustrated how MMER's data      management system and
high provenance    and pedigreed   data from its callers to report medical trends,  or highlight hot

spots for treatment  and attention. Finally,he crisismapping component     could provide a dynamic

report  on medical   supply chain   needs to disaster  relief agencies  so that  the medical   goods

provided  could more  directly reflectand respond  to the self-reportedneeds of the disaster affected

communities.
Kira Intralor





4. MOBILE TECHNOLOGIES             FOR HEALTH &        ESTABLISHING THE NEED FOR

                                          MMER


This Chapter seeks to present and define the nascentfield of mobile health (or mHealth) and the
subsequent role and potential impact MMER - itself a mobile health application - can play within

the health care system of low- and middle-income countries. We will then examine the

application of mHealth in health surveillance, and the importance and dominance of voice-based

mHealth initiatives over those that are text-based or electronic. With respect to MMER, health

burdens, access to health services, and mobile phone penetration will be mapped both globally

and in Haiti to reflect and illustrate the potential need for the system. Finally, the potential and
impact  of a mobile-based service like MMER to reach marginalized populations that are

otherwise isolated from accessing health systems will be established.


4.1 DefiningmHealthin mobiletelecommunications

The definition of mHealth - or mobile health - is broadly understood to be  the use of mobile
telecommunication for the improvement of health services and information within
                                                                                 public health
and health service delivery  systems (Stephanian, 2003). mHealth capitalizes on the mobile

phone's core utility of both voice and SMS, but also includes mobile technologies such as

smartphones or PDA's, with GSM/GPRS/3G or WiFi capability. More specifically, mHealth is a

subset of eHealth (or electronic health), which uses information and communication technology

(ICT) - such as satellite communications, computers or mobile phones - to provide health
servicesand  information. Sincethe definition of mHealth was established in 2003, the field has

"gained significantmomentum through the unanticipated spread of mobile telecommunications

infrastructure and uptake of handsets and services throughoulow- and middle-income countries

(LMIC's)" (Earth Institute, 2010).


Within the broader health systems framework, the opportunity        for mHealth lies in the

improvement of health system 'enablers', defined as having the ability to ensure effective use of

health system 'inputs' suchas financing, research and development, or service delive(Dalberg,

2010). Three health system 'enablers' were identified by an InfoDev study in which mHealth

could play a valuable role: first, in the improvement of information management in health care
systems (e.g., data collection mechanisms), second in the delivery of hecare (e.g., through the

mapping of health diseases or threats, knowledge sharing, and diagnosis) and third, through the

improvement of communication (e.g. health promotion, and information flows) (Chetley, 2006).



                                                                                           42
Kira Intrator



Another   way that mHealth could have impact within the healthcare system is in the creation      of
supply   chain management tracking tools that include user-based incentives to help track
                                                                                                 the
goods  at the point of delivery. As discussed in Chapter 3, supply chain management is critical

because  of unreliable supply chains and the frequent lack of access to life-saving treatments. This

can result from short-term shortages experienced   during regular (non-disaster) periods in LMIC's,

and particularly post-disaster, when supply chains break down and counterfeits      are increasingly

introduced.

4.2 Policy Debatesover mHealth

The domain within which MMER operates is two-fold: first,        it exists within the broad field of

disaster relief and recovery technology, and second,  it touches upon and is related to the sector of

mobile health.   Having  established the definition  of mHealth and the pervasive penetration of

mobile phones    in LMIC's, we now turn to      a more macro-perspective    on the current state of
research,  literature and potential limitations of mHealth in improving health outcomes in

developing countries.



mHealth has been labeled a "leap frog technology" for developing countries, especially    in regions

in which there are established mobile networks but weak healthcare         infrastructure (Krohn &

Metcalf, Chapter 1, 2012). According to     Fortney et al. (2011) twenty-first century healthcare
access goes beyond traditional     indicators of access towards those of geographic, financial,

cultural, and digital accessdue to the fact that most mHealth technologies promote an encounter-

less utilization, a form of patient and provider communication that lies outside of the scope of

traditional face-to-face clinical encounters. Concurrently there is an ongoing paradigm shift  away

from a hospital-centric health care system to one that is patient-centric;     one that provides a

decentralized distributed system where healthcare      resources such as process, placement and
people are redistributed (Krohn &   Metcalf, 2012,  Chapter 6). The emerging model is thus
                                                                                              one in
which the fit  between the patient and the healthcare services determines and dominates service

provision and dissemination (Fortney et al., 2011).



Not only does mHealth have the potential to reduce geographic and temporal access for isolated

or low-resource users, evidence suggests that the presence   of the 'digital-divide' along the socio-
economic ladder is less acute in mobile        phones when compared to other communication

technologies, such as the Internet.(Kaplan, 2006; Forestier, 2002)






                                                                                                  43
Kira Intrator


                 environments   do not imply a  major barrier  to the use of mobile phones    (Kaplan,
Resource-poor
2006).  As a healthcare   intervention,  mobile phones    appear  to have  a low threshold   of  access

(Geser, H.  2004). Moreover,    mobile  phones   are less expensive  to introduce  and to  install over

large areas as compared   to fixed land lines (Feldmann,  2003; Vodafone    Policy Paper, 2005).



Nevertheless,  major policy   debates loom large   over mHealth   for developing  countries  and  more

generally,  a questioning  of the value of communications     technology in   improving development
                                   (2006) there  are three strands  of policy perspectives  or debates
outcomes.   According   to Nelson
around  the value of  information  technology   in developing  countries (see Figure 13).  The first  is

the 'quick   fix', where  communications    (phone,   internet, computer,  etc.) are understood    as a

                           Pn    1)111   :                              superficial    response      to

                   \ lns      IIuDI   I     it   I it                   address        and        solve

                                                                        development         challenges,

                                                                        which    should    instead   be
                                                                        addressed    by    crosscutting

                                                                        and comprehensive      policies

                                                                        across   sectors  (see Figure

                                                                        13). The second    perspective

                                                                        builds upon    the concept   of

                                                                        the  'digital  divide'   where

                                                                        communications      policy    is
                                                                        seen   as  "increasing   social

                                                                                     due  to  elements
                                                                        gradients"
                                                                        such    as   knowledge      and

                                                 1lajr Ri.  12.   ./6information      barriers, lack of

                      Debates over the Impact of mHealth                financial      support      for
     Figure 13:Policy
                                                                       modernization,       and     the

absence   of human   capital for making   such changes   (Nelson,  2006; Kundu,    2004).  Finally, the
      perspective  is thatcommunications    technology   will benefit all segments  of the population;
third
that it will open both   opportunities  to women    and low-income    citizens, and help   disseminate

information   more  broadly. Proponents  of this perspective often point to case studies  conducted  in

Africa and   the Arab    states in which  the poor   have  been able   to access  technology   through

innovative means such as public facilities     or mobile phone sharing (Donner, 2008; Hammond,

2001; Nelson,   2006).



                                                                                                     44
KiraIntrator




Further clouding these debates is the fact that evidence can be found that both refutes and

supports the viewpoint    that mHealth is an effective healthcare intervention in developing

countries (Kaplan, 2006). A predicament in the field of mHealth is the significant gap that exists

in mHealth research in developing countries. Issues flagged are the lack of shared outcome

measurements in mHealth evaluations, the small number of controlled studies or randomized
clinical trials, the dearth of literature on mobile phones as a health intervention in chronic

conditions in developing countries, and limited evidence on overall cost-effectiveness of mHealth

interventions (whether in telemedicine or in studies of enhancing adherence to medicine)

(Kaplan, 2006).


Despite the pressing and undeniable need for additional evaluative, standardized and high quality

studies to be conducted in developing countries, the concept of accessing health information, data

and diagnosis through cell phones in LMIC's (low and middle-income            countries) exhibits

tremendous potential as a healthcare intervention (Kaplan, 2006).



4.3Adoption of mHealthinLMIC's

According to the International Telecommunication      Union, there are over 5 billion    wireless

subscribers worldwide, with over 70% of these residing     in low and middle-income countries,

dwarfing fixed internet deployment   and landline access. Mobile network penetration alongside

the growth and innovation    of the mobile phone market in producing increasingly powerful
handsets and cheaper data transmission, transforming the way in which information and health

services are accessed and managed (mHealth, WHO, 2011). The        mHealth   phenomenon    can be

largely attributed to the explosion of wireless capacity and services in developing countries;

where  mobile subscriptions in LMIC's numbered under 200 million in 2000,     at the beginning of

2009 subscriptions grew to a staggering 300 million (The Economist, 2009)    and still show signs
of rapid expansion in many countries in Africa,
                                                 as well as in India, China and Brazil (Dalberg,
2010). Today,   mobile phones are the technology device with the highest penetration in the

developing world.


Moreover, according to a survey conducted by the   World Health Organization (WHO), the most

frequently reported types of mHealth applications used in Member States were health call centers

(59%),   emergency   toll-free telephone services (55%), the management of disasters and

emergencies (54%) and mobile telemedicine (49%), with two thirds of all mHealth programs still


                                                                                               45
Kira Intrator


in the pilot or informal stage(mHealth, WHO, 2011). In Member States in the low-income        group

the most frequently  reported type of mHealth  applications were health surveillance initiatives and

health call center activity (mHealth, WHO, 2011).



With respect to the use of mHealth in LMIC's, health surveillance and disease tracking was

emphasized as having great potential. Two cases that were underscored in the WHO report on
mHealth was the use of Innovative Support to Emergencies Diseases and Disasters' (InSTEDD)

mobile phone data collection software in Thailand to record incidents of communicable diseases.

The 2003 outbreak of SARS in Cambodia revealed the limitations of the country's surveillance

system; Cambodia thus implemented the Cam e-WARN system that monitors disease outbreaks

via SMS and phone calls. The way in which the system operates is that provincial offices send the

data to the national office where it is then analyzed. When the number of disease cases inputted
by surveillance officers exceeds a predetermined threshold, a trigger is sent to the national

database flagging the issue and indicating a province or district. In response a team is sent to

investigate and take action. The result of Cam e-WARN was the Health Ministry's ability to

control the spread of disease, and to monitor rural district areas where Internet services are still

inaccessible and unavailable.


What is important to note is that advances in mHealth have resulted in innovations and the

increase in data collection and surveillance. Traditional studies compare pen and paper methods

of surveillance and data collection with mobile technologies (mHealth, WHO, 2011). However a

study conducted by Patnaik, Brunskill, and Thies went further and compared which type of

mobile functionality (electronic, SMS or voice) was the most accurate during data collection. The

study found that the voice collection method had the least errors,   followed by electronic forms,
and SMS (Patnaik et al., 2009). In addition, the adoption  of mHealth appears to follow a pattern,

in which it seems to be more easily adapted and "incorporated into processes and services which

traditionallyuse voice communication" (mHealth, WHO,       2011, p. 76).




4.4 Global HealthNeed& the Potential  Impactof MMER
The first step to understanding the potential    impact MMER could have in low- and middle-

income countries (LMIC's)     is to examine the health burdens and systems in place   at a country-

level. As illustratedin the MMER need-based map (Figure 14), there is     both a shortage of health

service providers  or physician density, especially in areas of high disability-adjusted   life year




                                                                                                  46
Kira Intrator


(DALY) rates.   The DALY rate is a measure of health that combines morbidity and mortality. It

quantifies the global burden of disease by country by incorporating an estimate of the years of life

lost (or premature mortality) with years lived with disabilities, thus measuring "health gaps as

opposed to health expectancies" (WHO, 2003). With respect to low physician density levels,

human resource shortages in the health sector of underserved regions and countries are a major
obstacle to a patient's access to specialized care or even treatment. Mobile technologies, such as

MMER, are a means of circumventing such obstacles by connecting patients to health-care

providers or community health workers in both urban and rural areas.



However LMIC's not only face significant      health burdens of infectious diseases, they also face
the 'dual challenge' of non-communicable diseases (see Figure 14). Furthermore, beyond the

national health burden is that of reaching urban and rural populations who face significant, but

unique challenges (see Figure 15,Dalberg, 2010).



MMER has the means to reach marginalized populations that are otherwise isolated (either
geographically   or economically) from health systems,        by providing     increased access to

information and services, regardless of the individual's social status, location or income. In cases

where  individuals do not have  their own mobile phone subscription it is common for individuals

to rent mobile phones locally or share among friends or family.    GrameenPhone's initiative with

the telemedicine firm TRCL, Ltd. to create a 'Healthline' consultation service is a potent
demonstration    of the power of mobile-based
                                                    health  care applications.  Healthline  enables
Bangladeshis to call doctors at a very modest charge, and since November 2006 Health Line has

received more than 3.5 million calls (Ivatury, 2009). Furthermore, a randomized survey found

that over 70% of users had no access to a health care provider within a 5-mile      radius (Ivatury,

2009). Mobile-based applications   such as 'Healthline' help bridge the physical and  economic gap

in health service delivery and support to serve low-income and isolated  patients.

















                                                                                                  47
Kira Intrator






                                                        Mapping Potential Need for MMER:

                                       Physician Density &Disease Burden rate (DALY) per 1000 inhabitants

















         ,0











                                                                                                        0 600 1,2002,400 3.000  4,800   A


          Legend
          Densityof Physicians, 2011      Agestandardizeddisability-adjusted
         per1000population                 lireyear (DALY)rates,2004
                                          per 1000population
          0  051- 40                            <15

          0   141300                            16-19
            03.0-5.00                           20-29
                -1000
            S5.01                               30-45                                                    se!kso       ,        4- :enargen  n
              _001                              >45                                      A o(ow,  ei.'veB,naeseas:!or-ecanorg-.ncox


Figure 14: Global Map of Health Burden                 &Need for MMER measured               by DALY rates and Physician            Density





       I   Rural population health challenges              Urban population  healt challene
       *   Low health   care worker    densitywhich    *   Inequitabdistributioofhealthcareresources.
           particularly limits pre-natal and maternalcare  suchthatthe poorlackaccessto affordable
           and resultsin large distancesfromspecialty      healthservices
           services
                                                       *   inalequatesanitation and refusecollection as
       "   Lackof supportinghealth care infrastructure,    wellasovercrowding conditionscontributeto
           ranging from   viable roads necessary for       easspread ofcommunicablediseases
           distributionof productst,o internetnetworks *   Unhealthylifestylesuchas consumption   of
           that transmit data,to electricity that could    cheapandconvenent  highfathighsugardiets,
           supporatcoldchaint,oclinics                     yet low in essentialnutrients, and sedentary

       *   Limitedefficienciefrom scale dueto  large       behavior,smoking, and the harmful use of
           distancesandwidely distributedpopulations       alcoholndothersubstances
       *   Vulnerability to climatic crises, civil strife,
           violencenddisplacement
       *   Poorlbalanceddiet leadingto malnutrition

       *   Cultural barriers aruusedmodern medicine,
           particularlfyorwomen'scestsohealth care
 Source:WHO;Vital Wave Consulting,HealthintheGlobalSouth LandscapAenalysis, 2008

Figure    15: Urban vs. Rural        Chart for mHealth.       From Dalberg,       2010






4.5 Health     &Mobile Penetration:            Establishing    the need     for MMER       in Haiti


We have thus found             that surveillance data collection through mobiles and                        call centers are areas of


nascent growth in mHealth                 for LMIC's, and that voice-based data collection thus                            far yields the






                                                                                                                                           48
 Kira Intrator




 most accurate data.    Hence the role of MMER as a targeted information             and health call-center, and

 secondarily as a data collection      surveillance system that utilizes bi-directional communication           (as

 opposed to a communication         system based on one-way messaging of health content)              through the

 collection of data   based on voice communication, appears promising.



               PILOT OF MMER


                               Country Analysis: Haiti Overview



                              Mobile      &                             Growth     Rate    of Mobile

             Telecommunications                Snapshot                         Penetration


             Mobile Penetration:                                       Moble Subscriptionwth in HaitiIti

             *   3 648 Millmobilusers(aA                         411o110o
             -   37%mobile penetrat(reach is approximately 4 times
                grater given mobile sharing/renting culture) (HuffngtonPost

             MobileSectorCarriers:
                 Dgiceprovides serstces(Irish ooned b investor 2ignWi.000
                 anlargest singlet530M.a quarofaitsanna,ationa                                             2
                tax revenueutes Mac, 31 20101                    1000,000
                corecelGSMSe  e|Vodal                          2      1
              - Ha TelCDMAservce                                             0
                                                                        2000'2001 2002 202005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010

            Health need: WHO level of burden otdisease
            (DALY   rate)





           Figure 16: Mobile   Penetration  & MMERReadiness       in Haiti




As indicated in the baseline      country analysis for Haiti (Figure 16) we note the high penetration of

mobile phone     use, and the continued and recent growth of mobile subscriptions. When
                                                                                                        combined

with information      from the map in Figure 17 we see that Haiti has            an extremely low density of

physicians (a ratio of less than 0.50 physicians 10000 inhabitants)                combined with one of the

highest DALY rate scores. From a policy perspective, Haiti               has yet to implement a unit in their

Ministry of Heath responsible for the implementation            of technology policy (see Figure 17). In the


long term, it is necessary that mHealth         initiatives be integrated into and built upon the existing

health system and be      accompanied more generally by public awareness campaigns and guidelines

for use.



From    a healthcare   perspective, in Haiti there is
                                                           limited access    to basic social    services such as

water and health care, and one in five children dies of a preventable           disease before the age of five




                                                                                                                49
Kira Intrator



(UN OCHA,    Report  2010). Even  prior to the2010  earthquake, the major causes  of childmortality

were  "diarrheal diseases, acute respiratory infections, and malnutrition"  (Pan  American   Health

Organization, Report  on Haiti, 1998). With respect to well-being and health, Haiti ranks 158th out
of 187 countries  inthe United  Nations Human    Development   Index (2011),  an index that broadly

calculates 'well-being' and provides   a "composite  measure of  three basic dimensions   of human

development:   health, education and income" (Human     Development   Index, 2011).  With deficient

sanitation systems, poor nutrition,  and inadequate  health services, almost half of overall deaths

were attributed  to respiratory infections, meningitis, diarrheal diseases  (including cholera and

typhoid) and HIV/AIDS    (CNN Health,   2010).


Moreover,   the Haiti HIV/AIDS    epidemic  is one of the most  extreme in  the Caribbean   with  an

estimated  rate of adult HIV infection(aged 15-49)  of 1.9%(UNICEF     Statistics,2010). Before  the

earthquake  an estimated   120,000 people    were living  with the  virus, which   included  12,000

children (UNAIDS,     2010). Since the  earthquake, in addition  to the outbreak  of cholera, it has
been  widely reported    that transactional  sex, sexual exploitation   and  sexual violence   have

increased greatly (AlertNet, 2012), likely furtherexposing  Haitian populations to HIV/AIDS.



Furthermore,  a mobile-based  rather than an electronic or internet-based health careservice option

was selected  due to the  accessibility and penetration  of mobile  phones over   the Internet  (see
        17). Mobile phone  health access would reign  over electronic access to health care in Haiti
Figure
not only due  to current  census numbers   that reveal that there were  40 mobile   phones per  100

individuals, compared   to only 8 internet  users per 100  individuals in Haiti in  2010 (UNICEF

Statistics,2010) but  also due to the  fact that intimes of crisis organizations such as Telecoms

Sans  Frontieres allow for a rapid response and  restoration of mobile cell towers, as compared   to

internet satellites and connections.



















                                                                                                  50
 Kira Intrator





                          The    as      Mapping PPresenceof aMedical TechnologyPoliv byCountryions


            kTheas
                                      Thae



                                        Theasllwa


                                                             TuTurks3CicoIs.

                                                               GP    Turks&gaicos,Is.





                                          es












    Leeu                                                                                         0  20 40  80   120  100
    1,'n0 95 ,fMI1nHseraRlthesponsiblef2011 MobilefPhysicia.                                                                 +.4
    Impleen. fTechP.ic,20I0perI000popl.tio.   (ellular SubscriptionAgestandardized d ioliear(DA1.0)rates.2004
                                          Numberof'subprir100inhabiperI000populatiou
   EJ    No                      0.50           NoData                   15
         Yes                    0.51-L40        1-44                    16-19

                                 1.41-3.00     45-88                    20-29



                             *   10.01


Figure 17: Map of Haiti, MMERReadiness               &Need




In summary,
                   MMER would allow disaster-affected communities in both                             urban and rural regions

to access and communicate across vast geographic distances                            with medical specialists and health


care providers around the world. Moreover, MMER                           could play a role in leveling out the social

gradient in health, where inequities result                 from social conditions among socially disadvantaged


populations,       creating a need for health systems to be more responsive                               to population needs


(Marmot,      2007). In the short term, financial support to help improve                       the use and access to health

services for the poor is critical. However the key issue                        is the reduction of financial barriers to


such services (Marmot, 2007): MMER could                              help reduce such financial obstacles, while

providing virtually any individual with a mobile phone
                                                                            with information and medical expertise in

real-time.















                                                                                                                                   51
Kira Intrator






                     5. ESTABLISHING          THE   NEED     FOR   MMER


The first segment of this chapter will revisit and restate the arguments for the need for MMER,
which  include  issuessuch  as the abilityof MMER    to skip the 'middleman'   within the chaos  of

disaster reliefcoordination, the prevalence  of mobile  phone  use post-disaster,and the  forms  of

communication   and  information needed  in disasterrecovery  captured within the two-way   flow of

information  when   utilizingMMER.    The  second  part of this chapter builds upon the   first,nd

introduces  the  widespread   issue of  illiteracy with  respect to  disaster recovery   and  relief

technologies, both  on the global scale, and  withinHaiti. It furtherillustrateshow a  system  like

MMER    can meet  this need by being voice-enabled.

5.1 Problem Identification& theSubsequent  Need  for MMER

As  outlined in Chapter  One, the  failureof the U.N. cluster system  to integrate,and  the lack of

coordination  inthe humanitarian   response in Haiti occurred  fora multitude  of reasons, but was

clearly  exacerbated  by   the sheer   number   of NGO's,     INGO's,   agencies  and faith-based

organizations  that inundated  Haiti. As illustrated in Figure  18, there were  over ten  thousand

                                  KAM: UNAgencbs. banmlsoaMmhanmis NGOspmamea










                               aair




                                             F'










     Figure18: UCF/NSF Map  of UNAgencies, Intl Orgs NGO  presence inHaiti (2011)

international organizations  and  NGO's   present in Haiti post-disaster, not including  local non-




                                                                                                 52
Kira Intrator


profit organizations. In addition to Haiti being inundated with thousands of external agencies was

the chaos of coordination that ensued. What is needed is a structure thatskips these 'middlemen'

to enable disaster-affected individuals to connect directlwith health care professionals; MMER

enables the caller to voice their direct need, and tohave these medical questions answered and

addressed by a medical professional.   Moreover,  what was  unique about the case of Haiti post-
disaster, and in the consequent use    of disaster relief technologies was the emergence and

explosion  in volume of highly skilled and mobilized global volunteers and the disaster-affected

communities.   Uniting these two emerging groups - the high impact global volunteers and the

affected communities    - is the central nexus at the core of Mobile Medical Emergency

Responders.



Chapter Two highlighted     that low and middle-income      countries (LMIC's, as defined and

categorized by the World Health Organization) are currently using mobile phones post-disaster as

a vital communication and life-saving tool, and that increased mobile penetration         is only
enhancing this trend. It was noted that mobile networks (with organizations such as TSF)
                                                                                             were
one of the quickest infrastructures to be restored post-disaster. Finally, Coyle's analysisof the

type of mobile application or communication     needed during   reconstruction (as opposed  to an

early warning system which    warrants a one-way system) was that of a two-way       exchange  of

information.  MMER utilizes bi-directional     communication    - a criteria for disaster relief

technology also  underscored  by New Technologies (2009) - and establishes a two-way flow of
information that recognizes and capitalizes on the fact that affected communities are a primary

source of knowledge and information for sound recovery. Thus the three elements covered in

Chapter Two are    also central to MMER's foundation: the use    of mobile phones post-disaster,

rapid cellular network recovery, and a need for a two-way exchange of information during the

disaster recovery phase.


Chapter Three exposed the vulnerability of humanitarian medical supply chains, as evidenced    by

issues such as the pervasive lack of traininof disaster relief workers in logistics and the presence

and insertion of counterfeit goods into themedical supply chain. Compounding the vulnerability

of a post-disaster medical supply chain is the need not only to track, store and secure such goods
throughout the chain, but also to gather more accurate real-time consumer driven data to assess

need. MMER's medical crisis map could help flag medical       trends or areas of high need, and

could also provide a high provenance and high pedigree need-analysis for supply chain

management to pharmaceutical companies and humanitarian organizations requiring such data.


                                                                                               53
KiraIntrator





Chapter Four established that mobile health (mHealth), and the subsequent potential for a service

like MMER, is a rapidly growing and much needed service, enabling health care knowledge             to
reach marginalized populations in developing countries. Moreover, the most frequently reported

and utilized mHealth applications in LMIC's were health surveillance initiatives and health call

centers (mHealth, WHO, 2011) both of which are key elements of MMER's structure. In

addition, studies revealed that voice-based data collection yielded more accurate data (Patnaik et

al., 2009) in comparison to collecting the information via SMS or electronic-based       entries from

users. MMER capitalizes on this finding, as it too collects its data for both             its medical

practitioners, and crisis mapping services, via voice.



5.2 Giving 'Voice' to the Illiterate


At first glance, the use of disaster relief technology like Ushahidi or FrontlineSMS - a two-way

mass messaging system appears to have exploded the growth of new communication channels,

crowdsourcing and information infrastructures within and for communities affected by disaster.

However, not all communities benefited from these new technologies due to the fact that MMS

and SMS-based disaster     relief technology exclude illiterate individuals  from first-hand access,

use, and ability to leverage this technology to warn, prepare, inform or influence their life-critical
decisions or movements.





























                                                                                                   54
                                             of         in                          in                                                                    55
                            now   for              and       the                              list       for        the

                                        system                     market mobile              the
                                  need       lack       rates                            countries             MM   aERd,
                                  a                          to    the                         To   established           illiteracy.
                                                   density                    of                                          of
                            have             the                   of                                    readinesse now
                                                                        the impressive         19).
                                                        DALY                                             and
                                                                                                    both            can
                                                                                                               system

                            We    establishestdroupghhyshiciaadditrioandthroughrowthpene dtrvte(nigiure need   a    we    dimension



                                                                                                                              Disease
                                                                                                N                             o      Rates),
                                                                                                                              Burden

                                                                                                                              Level,
                                                                                                   4,800                            (DALY
                                                                                                                           20WCountry

                                                                                                   3,600                   Po2WHO1l.0,
                                                                                                                              2004
                                                                                                                          2011WHOce,,
                                                                                                   2,400                      Rates,ofDisease
                                                                                                                              Year
                                                                                                                         WokfoLifele.GeoDaw
                                                                                                   1,200                 th naeuredyonmiedical
                                                                                                                         Hel        Burden
               &                                                                                                         ofEONPauio
                                                                                                   0  60rates,2004       Atla ur-1d
                                                                                                                              Disa
                                                                                                                         -Gobalselinecountrvsy
                                                                                                        (DAlY)
                                                                                                        year               Subsipions-
               Subscriptions                                                                            life                  Stndaniue
                  Country                                                                                                     - Age Subscriptions,
                  by                                                                                                          I
                                                                                                                        'So-enci-lhePCnhoeylluosogiayPolicyCnir

                  Policy                                                                                                            Phone
               Mobile Phone                                                                             disabilit19adjusted

                                                                                                          population 20-2930->45
                                                                                                                                    Mobile
               MMER:                                                                                    st1000rdized                by
                  Technology                                                                            Ageper
               for

                  Medical                                                                                 inhabitants
                  a                                                                                     2009                           Country.
               Readiness                                                                                  1(0                       generated
                                                                                                          per                          by

                                                                                                        Subscriptions,
               Potentialce                                                                                                          MMER
                                                                                                          ofbsNoIData45-889-3233-232   Policies
                                                                                                        Cellular                    for

               Mapping                                                                                  Mobileer
                                                                                                                                    Need
                                                                                                        2011                        &
                                                                                                                 1.40 3.00   1(0.00
                                                                                                                     -   -5.0-         Technology
                                                                                                          population1-   3.1 5.01
                                                                                                        of Physicians,
                                                                                                              0  9   *   *1.40  *    >10.01
                                                                                                        Denpsietyr1000              Readiness
                                                                                                                                    of Medical

                                                                                                                                       and
                                                                                                                                    Map
                                                                                                        Responsiblfeor

                                                                                                          Policy,                   World
                                                                                                          ofTech                       Density,
                                                                  -a.                                                               19:
                                                                                                        MinistryofHealth
Intrator                                                                                                in
                                                                                                    LegenditImplementation
Kra                                                                                                                                 FigPhysician
Kira Intrator





Global adult illiteracy levels(Figure 20) compounds both the need and the demand       for a voice-

based disaster reliefsystem. Not only does MMER open the market to       illiterate populations (and

visually impaired individuals), but also due to its universal accessibility the user does not need to
be trained in a new visual interface, nor do they    need to pay additional costs associated with

maintaining the visual component or data delivery of the device. Finally, MMER's IVR system

would reduce the  cost for the user, and provide the service of handling large call volumes, and if

callerssought similar sets or forms of information it would also allow access to this data 24 hours

a day (Mallik, 2003).


MMER: Access for Illiterate Populations

MMER     is a means to reach marginalized populations affected       by natural disaster that are

otherwise isolated (either geographically   or economically) from health systems, by providing

increased access to information and services,  regardless of the individual's social status, location

or income. MMER is not an emergency call center, or a 911-equivalent:             it addresses the

requirements of the recovery and reconstruction phase(s) of a disaster response. Hence, the

medical needs it will be responding to and address would likely be more chronic in nature, and it
would focus on the dissemination and exchange of medical information rather than an immediate

emergency-response or direct   service follow-up".



The central tenet of MMER, both as a mobile health application and a disaster relief technology,

is the ability to serve and cater to illiterate populations. In contrast with well-executed and
established literacy-dependent  MMS    and SMS-based disaster relief technology (e.g., Frontline

SMS or Usahahidi) MMER focuses on voice-response and voice-activated                questions and

responses. In this manner, when mapping possible regions for MMER deployment, high-illiteracy

zones will be taken into account. At the front-end MMER caters to illiterate populations through a

voice-driven infrastructure using an Interactive Voice Response system (IVR), supported by

IBM's Watson healthcare application to further strengthen and increase the robustness and quality
                             back-end with the response of a medical practitioner     to the users
of call-routing, and at the
queries and call.



12Despitethe fact that MMER and its outreach marketingmessages(see SystemDesign,    Chapter Six) are
catered to non-emergency  and medical needs, thereis a possibilityof individualslling the system for
non-medical reasonsor needs.  For this reason,the welcoming IVR menu option (See   Figure 23) helps
transfer outhese typesof callsto otheragencies, or restates and informshe caller of MMER's  capacity

and use.


                                                                                                 56
 Kira Intrator



 Addressing   a Global Issue

As illustrated                     3
                in the map below,    illiteracis a global issue; incountries such as Guinea,   Benin,
 Burkina Faso, Mali, Niger   and Afghanistan adult literacy rates
                                                                   are below 30%, and in countries
 such as Bangladesh,  Bhutan and Nepal total adult literacy  rates range between 52.8%and 56.5%.

 We can thus see    the potential application of MMER to     regions in which illiteracy, cell phone

access and  low access to physician treatment and information   reign.



The   two maps below (Figure 20 and 21) illustrate     the need and potential for MMER's       global

application using illiteracy and disaster   risk as driving factors and indicators.   The first map
presents global adult literacy rates
                                      - indicating countries within which MMER       could have the
greatest  impact  and be   of maximal use to illiterate   individuals.
                                                                       The  second map provides a






























  Figure 20: World Map of Adult Literacy - Mapping MMER'sNeed Globally


general snapshot of global hazard exposure   and natural disaster risk by country, generated  by the

United Nations International Strategy    for Disaster Reduction's Global Assessment Report        on
Disaster Risk Reduction (GAR, 2011).
                                        By comparing the maps we see countries in     which MMER
might be of use - to respond  to and focus in on disaster-prone regions and  populations that would



13An interactiversion cabe accessed here: http:/www.mit.edu/-intrator/kira/amnap.html


                                                                                                  57
Kira Intrator


otherwise  be overlooked  by (if even present)  literate-baseddisasterrelieftechnologies.



The  'Multi  Risk  Class' global  disasterrisk indicator (see Figure  21)  is based on mortality   risk

analyses.  The  indicator  was  generated  by compiling    geographic  and  physical  information   on

specific hazard  events  such  as cyclones,  earthquakes,  floods, and landslides   in addition to the
                                                                            of the  mortality or multi
footprint and  impact  of these (GAR,   2009, Chapter  2). . One  limitation
risk  class indicator  in Figure   21 is  the  fact  that drought   is not  represented,  which   thus

underestimates   mortality  risk for countries in  some  regions, especially  in Africa  (GAR,   2009,

Chapter  2). The mortality  risk indicator is an average  of absolute  (average  deaths per  year) and

relative risk (killedper million per year) by country.  The classification system  was then  compiled

into a mortality risk classor index  with the minimum    ofzero expressing  unknown    exposure, three
                                                                                                  high
indicating a medium-low     classificationof mortality risk,a classification of seven  flagging a
mortality  risk, and the  maximum     classificationof nine  signaling a 'major'   mortality  risk(see

Figure  21). For each  impact  area, the exposure   was  computed   as the number   of people  and the

value  of  economic   assets within  that area;  disaster risk in Figure  21  is thus  defined  as the

"probability  that a hazard event of a give magnitude   will occur, the number  of exposed   people  or

the value of exposed  assets, and the level of vulnerability" (GAR,  2009,  Chapter  2, p.20).

                                           MultiiskClass(MRI)
                                                 (2009)

















     5-6
     4.5


      Ndata


 Figure21: Global Assessment  Report on Disaster Reduction, 2011. RiskIndicator: Multiple Mortality
 RiskClass.(UN  ISRDR, preventionweb.net)





                                                                                                     58
Kira Intrator


MMER: Illiteracy in Haiti


When applying these two elements -illiteracy and persistent risk        and vulnerability to natural

disasters - we find Haiti ranking high in both. In addition to Haiti's health burdens, Haiti's adult

literacy level - defined as those aged fifteen and   over - barely reaches 50%. Moreover, Haiti's
overall adult literacy rate according to Haiti's   national census is extremely gendered (IHSI -

Institut Haftien de Statistique et d'Informatique, 2003) with an extremely low rate of literacy in

both Creole and    French at 48.6% for women, and 60.1% for men, further isolating Haitians -

especially women- from public health campaigns, information, access and potentially direct      care.

In addition, two major literacy trends were identified in the 2003 Haitian National Census     report

(IHSI, 2003). Literacy was particularly low in rural regions of Haiti with an   overall rural literacy
rate of 38.6%,    and inter-generational progress   in literacy is evident  with
                                                                                 youth aged 15-29
displaying the highest rates of literacy at 75.4%, compared to     those aged 60 and older with a

literacy rate of only 18.1%(IHSI, 2003). We can thus start    to conjecture that rural populations in

older age-brackets are likely to be illiterate, less likely to be able to use SMS or MMS-based

disaster relief technology, and that therefore a product such as MMER would be of a strong value

add.


Haiti, Vulnerability & Continued Disaster Risk

In its  synthesis report, the IPCC Working Group I (IPCC, 2007) highlighted               four main

dimensions of climate change relevant to cities. First, heat waves will increase in frequency      in

most regions. Second, heavy precipitation and flooding will also affect most     areas; current data

suggests that a significant increase in flooding is already  taking place in many regions (World

Bank, 2009). Third, drought will increase   in scope (with severe impacts  on  multiple sectors such

as health, food  production and energy supply). Fourth, there will likely be an increase in the
intensity of tropical cyclones and  extreme high sea level rise. With respect to
                                                                                 this fourth impact,
the IPCC report further states that evidence suggests "substantial increases in intensity and

duration [of tropical storm and hurricanes] since the 1970s. In the extratropics,      variations in

tracks and intensity of storms reflect variations in major features  of the atmospheric circulation,

such as the North Atlantic Oscillation" (IPCC,2007, FAQ 3.3)


In light of the climate  change impacts listed above, Haiti faces and will continue to face an

increasing frequency  and  magnitude of extreme climactic events.   The  main natural hazards in the

Caribbean are meteorological - including floods, droughts, landslides and tropical cyclones. Haiti




                                                                                                  59
Kira Intrator



lies within the hurricane belt and its horseshoe    shape makes for a particularly long coastline,

increasing   Haiti's vulnerability  to flooding   (UNDP, 2001).        The likelihood    of landslide

occurrence   is alsohigh due   to the fact that Haiti is located on the  mountainous   section of the
Hispaniola  island; two-thirds of the country  lives on slopes thatexceed 20  per cent  grade. Haiti's

severe  deforestation further exacerbates  the countries vulnerability to landslides,with less than  2

per cent of Haiti's 1970  forest-cover remaining, (Picariello, 1997) further aggravated  by a 3.4 per

cent change in annual    deforestation (UNDP, 2001).     During the rainy  season (July   to October)

Haiti's rivers overflow, increasing   the risk to floods  and landslides.  The social  and economic
                                                                                    Haiti's resilience
impact of  climate change   and natural hazards will  only further serve to reduce
and  ability to respond to futuredisasters; as underscored  in the Tearfund  report: "Climate  change

altersnot only  physical hazards  but also vulnerability"(Tearfund, 2009).



In summary,   Haiti faces one of the highest  relative risks to disasterin the world  (UNDP,   2005).

Vulnerability  can be  generally understood  as existing at two levels: the external dimension--   the
shocks  and stresses  to which individuals   are  subject to,and the internal  dimension--the   social

capacity  of individuals, households  and communities    to adjust to damage  and  loss in the face of

climate  change  and natural hazard  impacts  (World Bank,   p.6, 2010). In addition, climate  change

is linked closely to assets- the more assets  individuals have and the  more diverse  their assets,the

less vulnerable they are, and vice versa  (World Bank,   2010). Hence  from an individual   assetbase
and from  a community    asset perspective (i.e., financialr productive  assets) poor populations  are

at the highest risk in the event of natural disasters. Thus Haiti's unfavorable   ranking is not only

due to increased   natural hazard   occurrence,  climate change impacts,   and acute   environmental

degradation,  but it is also driven  by social and   internal factors (e.g., assetsor institutions) in

which  human vulnerability   plays a central role.



Summary

This section  argued  the need for MMER     as a healthcare intervention system  that allows illiterate
                communicate    directly with healthcare   professionals. The need    for MMER     was
individuals  to
underscored  by  revisiting previous chapters and the gaps  in existing disasterrelief technology that

the former had revealed. The examination of issues such as the lack of access to health care (e.g.,

physician  density), impressive mobile phone penetration and mobile phone usage in LMIC's,

compounded    by the  issue of global illiteracy and regional disaster risk and vulnerability, further
                                                                             design  of MMER.     The
helped  support and   form the  type of  service and  ultimately the system
gaps  MMER fills    range from:   its abilityto unite affected  communities   and their  self-reported



                                                                                                    60
Kira Intrator



needs directly to global volunteers and medical experts, providing crisis maps and medical supply

assessments,   through to providing isolated communities in developing countries access to
healthcare information through mobile cell phones. Having established the existing gaps and need

for a system like MMER, we now turn directly to MMER to clarify its system design and

function.


























































                                                                                                   61
Kira Intrator





                               6. MMER       SYSTEM DESIGN



6.1 System Overview

The vision I have for MMER is to develop a telephony system that    works on landline and/or any

type of mobile phone to be used post-disaster during the 'reconstruction'  phase (a month or so

after the event occurs). MMER will likely have two types of interfaces:  Web and Mobile phone.

The main part of the project concerns the use of mobile phone or landline telephones for calling

an easy to remember and cheap/free phone number      (much like a 311 system and number).      A
Web interface is used by medical specialists    (the 'responders') so that they can access the

information  provided by the caller intheinitial phaseof the call (e.g., type of ailment, paiage,

location of caller).


6.2 Core Mechanics & Purpose

MMER will be utilized and deployed        during the reconstruction and recovery phase of a
humanitarian response (rather than upon immediate impact) to assist two types of users: primarily

the population  affected by the natural disaster, and secondarily humanitarian aid workers who

need additional  medical advice to guide their assistance in camps or in the field with affected

communities. MMER saves time and lives by prioritizing and sorting calls and cases,        while

mobilizing medical specialists to engage in high-impact public service at any time of   day and
location (since calls could be routed to the volunteers' home
                                                                numbers at times that are most
convenient to them).



InteractiveVoice Response (IVR) as of yet has never been applied to or used in medical disaster

relief technology. On the front-end, the MMER IVR system will request the caller's (a disaster

victim or aid worker's) basic profile information, and through a series of questions (created

against a corpus of medical knowledge and based upon interactive responses   given at each step)
will gather the caller's symptoms. Using analytics the call is then prioritized and routed to  a

doctor specialized in the treatment or ailment pre-identified by the caller.



As highlighted in the CDAC   2011 report on 'Lessons from Haiti' a major challenge presented by

the generation   and proliferation  of new technologies    was their integration into existing
humanitarian aid structures and organizations. Similar to the break-down and lack of stream-lined

coordination between the 10,000 international organizations and agencies in Haiti (UCF, NSF



                                                                                              62
 Kira Intralor


 Map of UN Agencies,     Figure 18, 2011) disaster relieftechnologies were not built to
                                                                                         inter-operate
 with one another. Thus   the inevitable problem of these  technologies not being able  to 'talk' with

 one another and producing     a lot of independent information   'noise' is simultaneously   created.

 Moreover, due   to these obstacles the potential for these same technologies to   have a short-shelf

 life between disaster episodes is heightened. The  technological capacity I therefore  wish to use is
 one that streamlines the software and increases    the quality assurance and quality
                                                                                        control of the
 IVR digital  triage. An additional general  technological parameter needed    is one that employs a

 voice input to an Artificial Intelligenceengine with a health care diagnostic   tool. Moreover, the

 technology  in question needs to be  in a form that is modular enough,   and nearing readiness (i.e.,

 is available as a service) so as to fit into the MMER framework.     Currently, the technology   that
 fits these parameters is IBM's Watson, which is further being
                                                                 applied to the healthcare industry.


IBM's Watson     is a "...computing system   that rivals a human's  ability to evaluate a hypothesis,

learn from additional   evidence and confidently respond     to complex questions posed     in natural

language with    speed and accuracy." (IBM Software,       Solutions for Healthcare,   2012). In the
context of healthcare,  IBM's Watson can apply
                                                  and combine predictive root cause   analysis (using
built-in medical terminology) with natural    language processing. Moreover,     IBM's Watson also

has  the potential to generate a standardization technique for digital triage that would introduce a

superior level of quality assurance.  Unlike current disaster relief technologies that would have to

be updated or replaced   by newer and faster technologies, by    integrating Watson at the front end
of MMER, one could
                       isolate and update the software  as IBM's Watson continues to be developed
and updated over   time.


6.3 The MMERUserCycle



The  user cycle  diagram   illustrates the simplifieduser cycle: the user's decision-making   points,
interaction with and use of    MMER. The user is a member
                                                                  of the affected community - an
information-seeking literate  or illiterate individual who wishes to gain access to basic health care

information or an initial  diagnosis. It would serve the   individual who otherwise lack access    to

such information;  for example due to geographical   isolation, the destruction of surrounding health

clinics during the disaster, a lack of  transportation to a given center or  facility, or the general
absence of physicians or nurses on
                                     hand to respond to the users medical  queries. A second type of
user would be    an individual  who  had  previously sought or received    initialtreatment in
                                                                                                field
hospitals in the aftermath of  the disaster, but currently needs follow-up treatment, guidance and




                                                                                                   63
KiraIntrator



advice  (such as caring for a surgery or wound)   due  eitherto the fact thatthe field hospital is no

longer present, or can no longer  take on  patients.A third category  of user could be an  individual
                                                        or one  who  needs more   long-term  careand
suffering from  a chronic disease (such  as HIV/AIDS)
information  over an extended  period of time  (e.g.regnant  women).


























































                                                                                                   64
                                                  fort                                                  of        at
                                                                                                             an                                   65
                                                                                                   with                 able
                                                    potential                                                "in             reach.
                                                  pin/discom
                                                                                                        Directtart interface and
                                                                     for
                                                    giagnosis                                                           are
                                FatR      i       experiences      totime by)                      Familiaritynd  and        target
                                                    Seeio              eia                                              who
                                      e                [treatment    waiting                                                 to
                                 l  g                                                                        use"
                                  n                                neaccess,nd/near                usage.    to
                                                                          on
                                  c te                             medical                                        technology wishes
                                      process                                                           technhowgist
                                                                   Unmgeetographic                                      individuals
                                      and                                                                         aew  to
                            Start predis                                                                relief               MMER
                                pediasnumber                                                       pre-disasterow

                                aroutrh MER                                                        or
                                      ,                                     Call                        disaster       cateriwhom
                                                                          ::practitioner                     already
                                                                            MMER                                  introducing
                                                                          :
                                                                            places                 outreach
                                                                                                        leadipeoplehus situation,
                                                                            User                        a                    individuals
                                                                                                   media               the
                                                                                                             that
                                                                                                                       of
                                                                                                        Snoad,
                                                                                                   social         interview).isolated
                                                                          menu                                         chaos
                                                        locdNoftE         and                                systems
                &                                                                                                      and
                                                                                                             are  2011,
                survey)r                                           Cycle  message                  through. Nigel
                IVRto                           V               fedM        setxlan                               July
                   cofer                                                                                     win       'noise'
                   bymembers                                    p  Unsegr wecpefseentotion,                                  geographically
                                                            emerencyvolunteers                    MMER       will
                LooMouthm                                                                              essential.      the   and
                                ouu                                                               of   is         (Snoato
                                                                            ~
                FeeWordofs/cormmunity                                                                                  add

                                                                       Searchlclciio                         that "what
                                -                                           ~                     informedaster   everyday"
                                                                       Topic                                           likelyechnically
                                                                          wy~comand               is   the
                                                                                                       to    statesse
                                nstnic                                 Medicoprompts/systemn                           wouldmore
                                                                       of)userAVs oamdcloontoe    user            they
                               ofSm u                                                                  prior                than
                                tvpotentior                                                       the
                                                                       Choeom hougfue                        division, event
                               toestionolassifyong
                                medical                                                           step,                     rather
                                  neaaesyDstems                                                        system)
                              reProvides                      the                                                      disaster
                                                              on,ofSi                                             the taols
                              MedClrcaonmiatent)     tUser       type                             'start')        on
                                                                   Coptureor                   Outreach      Technologyof
                                                              Questfeel                           (or  the                  technology,
                                                     th       to                   Cycle                          back
                                                                   thev                                                wake
                                                              responds                         Cycle:st      Reliefall      new
                                                                                   User                                the  to
                                                              Useevdiscomnforttaobnarocsne        the  minimum         in
                                                                                              Userin
                                                                                                       at         peopler
                                                                                    MMER's                   Disaster
                                                                                                       (or             of,  quickly
                                               Practitioner                         22:
Intrator                                                                                      MMERdepicted             time
                                               Medical                                                                      adapt
Kira                                                                                Figure    The As   MME   GRoogemer thencty
KiraIntrator


One  of the firstoutreach mechanisms    MMER    would  utilizein Haiti would  be the  radio:in talk

shows  or with examples  by the host who would   walk through  thesystem  to illustrateow  MMER

functions. According  to the 'Lessons  from Haiti' CDAC    report (2011) one of  the main  findings

was  that "although much of  the attentionhas been  paid to new media technologies,  radio was  the

most  effective tool forserving the  needs of the public. The first media  priorityin Haiti was to
restore radioservice (as it wasin thetsunami and  other recent crises)."

                                                                        A  second  point of contact

      W1     I   l                                                       for   individuals    with
             Radio broadcasting ((:') \,   O211
         A   1 scr traincd aaclinic inthe  utse  \ I I R                 longer-term  needs   (e.g.,

             intitUI)i    unzed w  n~cr a n  establ2is   o11)            pregnancy  or  individuals

                                                                         with             diabetes,
              orHIV/AIDS)    would  be for the user to beintroduced to MMER    at theirlocal clinic.
hypertension
During  their firstcheck  up; they  would  be  given the phone  number,   and a  quick  course and

information  session  on how   it functions and when   to call (concept  from  brainstorming  with

Meredith   McLaughlin,    interview March   2012).  A point   stressed by Jacobo    Quintanilla  of

Internews  (interview,August   8 2011) was that of institutionalizingnd  integratingMMER     within

the folds of an established agency  or internationalnonprofit  organization so that the technology
          rolledout with  a bundle of other directservice provisions and an existing disaster relief
could be
effort. Therefore  the final outreach method   would  be to integrate  MMER     within  an existing

organization's call centerstructure, likethe InternationalRed  Cross' popular  311-type  callcenter

(referto Chapter  2.3 fordetailson IRC's  callcenter system).



Moreover,   what is  essential to note   is that the key new   systems   proposed   in the MMER
infrastructure are not  the front-end technologies  used directly  by the  caller, wherein  a basic

mobile  phone  to callintoMMER's     voice-enabled  system. Rather the focus and  the innovation of

the  system  lie in the use  and  combination   of MMER's     backend  components.    The  backend

modules   capitalizeon call centertechnology  (such as IVR), Al  engines (i.e,IBM's Watson),    and

crisis management    systems  (such  as crisis mapping  and  medical  logistic needs). Below   is a
                                                                                              23 --
summary   table of the main  user cycle steps -- outlinedin theuse case  user cycle in Figure
with the  associated modular  technology  selected for MMER's   current system  design, which  will

be further expanded  and elucidated  upon in thisChapter.









                                                                                                 66
Kira Intrator



         USER STEP/TYPE                 USERINTERACTION/USER TYPE                    TECHNOLOGY      USED


Outreach or Marketing       prior to   User type:
                                                                              e   Radio broadcasts
call                                   -    Affected community members/       *   Clinic training to outgoing
                                            those with medical needs              patients.
                                       e    Localmedical  practitioners,
                                                                              *   Public service announcements
                                            health care workers,                  in key areas (camps,
                                            humanitarian workers                  temporary settlements).


MMER's number is dialed;        call   User utilizes landline or celphone     *   IVR menu (Tropo) system

isplaced                                                                          activated.
                                                                              *   Location of call is determined
                                                                                  to help select language/dialect

                                                                                  to use and process with
                                                                                  IVR/MMER      system.


Menu options announced                 User listens and responds to           e   Language   recognition software
                                       prompts, undertakes menu                   (for both the pre-recorded IVR
                                       selection.
                                                                                  questions  and for processing
                                       *    Caller first selects 'medical         the given responses).
                                            problem' on first menu, then     e    Voice enabled IVR 'key   word'

                                            on secondary menu routed  to          search function (Tropo).
                                            'back-end' IBM Watson
                                            system for secondary

                                            screening,as needed.
                                       *    Secondmenu selection: option
                                           for medical information.

                                           Voice-enabled search.
                                       *   Other: non-medical needs are
                                           transferred out.

Menu choices made                      User selects preferred service in     (a)  IVR Routing, using Al system

     (a)  First menu: automated,       menu of selections through voice           to triage effectivelynd
          Second menu:                 response (ortouch  toneif desired)         efficientlyutilize(and protect
         differentiated decision-                                                 scarce supply ofskilled staff).
                                                                                  Caller infostored in database.
          making (e.g.,medical
         need, follow-up  call,other                                              Crisismap  generated  from
         assistance). Finalstep:                                                  data.
                                                                                         locationdetermined
         speaking  to Medical                                                (b)  Clinic
         specialist,as needed.                                                    using Ushahidi  platform or
     (b) Locate nearest clinic                                                    automated weekly calls that

     (c) Medical  Topical Search                                                  collectupdated  resource info.
    (d) Other    (i.e., transfer call                                             from clinics using IVR/Tropo
         out if non-medical issue)                                                system.
                                                                             (c) IVR   pre-programed voice-

                                                                                  based search function. Pre-
                                                                                  recorded public messages in

                                                                                  language needed. (Tropo)
                                                                             (d) IVRtransfers   out call.
                                                                                  Automated message.





                                                                                                              67
Kira Intrator



User Interaction

The first technicaltask is initiated when the call is placed to ascertain whatanguage capability is
needed. The backend of MMER thus knows where          the call is originating from, and activates a

pre-recorded welcome message in that      given language/dialect. Moreover, MMER would          also

have language recognition   capability so that the IVR system could  also identify and further adapt

the dialect of MMER to the dialect or language of the caller.  With respect to the user interaction

with MMER, the user    would first receive a welcome   message (see Figure  22, for user cycle) that
would provide an overview of the service     (i.e., that MMER responds to medical queries);    how

MMER functions (that the    user will need to respond to a few question prior to being   transferred

to a medical practitioner)   and finally manage and    set user expectations. This    third point is

essential as one of the biggest risks  faced by social media or related disaster relief tools   that

"crowd-sources    information   for humanitarian   needs assessments"     is that of raising user
expectations  and not meeting these     expectations, as information   provided by the user     and

captured by the system or organization  is interpreted as an"implied or perceived promise   of help"

(Norheim-Hagtun & Meir, 2010, p.87).

      A quick overview of the last four main   steps of MMER is as follows.

     >First, a selection by the caller of a medical topic search with a pre-recorded message,      a
        request to locate the nearest clinic, or the chance to speak to a medical practitioner    is

        made (see Figure 23 for a   detailed use case analysis and breakdown of options   other than

        direct advice and information from a medical   practitioner).

     >Second    ,fthe caller chooses to speak with a practitioner it triggersa series of interactive
        voice  response questions (such as location, age, gender,     location/severity of pain or

        discomfort) that the caller answers (see diagram 'Proof of Concept', Figure 23 for IVR

        structure and a more detailed breakdown of the questions    posed and decision tree cycle).

        With the support of IBM's Watson, these       responses would help route the call to the

        appropriate volunteer; while the answers  and information provided by the caller would   be
        captured and streamlined into a database for the medical practitioner to have on hand and

        further expand upon when speaking     directly to the patient.

     >Third, the medical volunteer   has the caller's responses on-hand, responds   to their queries

        and informs them    - if needed - of the nearest  clinic. Finally, oncethe call is complete
                                                                                           to a brief
        between   the caller and themedical responder, the user has the choice to respond
        satisfaction survey to ensure  that the voice,opinion and needs   of the users are captured

        and utilized to furtherimprove MMER's      design, structure,nd ability to serve its primary

        client - the affected community.



                                                                                                  68
Kira Intrator




Below is a use case    scenario of an individual needing assistance with amputation           and wound care.



                       POST AMPUTATION INFECTION                OF WOUNDS/LIMBS
  Background        Information: LirnbLoss Statistics in Haiti (post-earthquake)'

            POST EARTHQUAKE
                 *    Estimates  of 2000 to 3000 people    with limb loss

                 *    Majority  are women   and children
                      Majority  are below the knee amputations

                 *    Numbers    will grow over  the next months    to year due to poor infection
                      treatment  from trauma


  Use Case Scenario: Amputation

  A caller   with a recent   amputation   is experiencing   moderate   pain  from   leg amputation that     has
  not fully healed.   They decide   to call MMER     to find information    on how to care for    the wound,

  but   are  hesitant  to speak   with  a specialist.  From   the main    menu    they  choose   1 by saying
  "specialist".  When    asked  what   their current  level of pain is they say (or press)     the number     3

  button   on their   phone.  The system    then  asks them    where their   pain  is located and   they  reply
  "recent    amputation".    The   IVR   system   picks  up the    word   "amputation"     and   the  caller is
  redirected to   the question path    for amputations.   The caller answer    "yes"   to the question, "Did

  you have surgery within      the last two years?";  and "below the    hips"  to the  question  "Where    was
  your   surgery  located  - was it above   or below   your hips?".   Finally when   asked "Do     you have   a

  large  wound that    is healing  and dry, or an    open   wound that    is still moist?"  they reply  "open
  wound".


  The   caller is then  transferred  to a medical  practitioner/specialist  in the field of amputation     and

  wound    treatment.

   (NB: This use case scenario is based on existing coded    MMER system programmed        by Kira Intrator  &

  Luke Read at the University of Central Florda's METIL Lab under Dr. Metcalf)



































                                                                                                               69
   Kira Intralor















                                              I'-

                                                   MAMIU







1









          fTU






















                                                              -I-





                            x


            "~ ~l.kU~



   Figure 23: Draft 'Proof of Concept' IVR structure






                                                                                                           70
 Kira Intrator


 Alternative Options

As illustrated in Figure 23, the alternate options (Numbers 2-4) provided in  the menu options of

 MMER go beyond providing      live patient to provider communication  and advice. The alternative

 options in the menu options  are: locating the closest, clinic, camp, specified NGO (option 2 in
 Figure 23), a topic medical search (option
                                             3  in Figure 23), and a non-medical topic search or
query (option 4). With  respect to the location of the nearestclinic or camp (option 2), the caller

would   provide their location and an automated response would provide them with the information

of the closest service they were requesting. Given that MMER is activated and maintained during

the recovery  phase, information on service-providing   clinics would likely be more established
and mapped by organizations such
                                    as Ushahidi and the United Nations. This information    would
then be coded into MMER      to provide callers with a verbal response. The general medical topic

search would be     voice-activated and would tap into a pre-recorded     library of standardized

messages that would conform      to the humanitarian medical norms (e.g.,   by the World Health

Organization or the   United Nations). The final alternate option - a non-medical query or topic
search -
          would inform the caller that MMER is a medically      focused service and is unable to
provide them   with the information they are requesting(and potentially provide the caller with
                                                                                               the
name  or number of another service, depending  on the context/country).



Output - Crisis Mapping

A final output of MMER      would be the production of user-generated,     high provenance crisis
maps. The data would    be extracted from the database and patient  logs created during the course

of the call. More  specifically, the information would be obtained  from the responses the callers

would  provide to the IVR portion of their call (age,gender, location and general ailment/medical

need). Major disaster relief agencies, international organizations, pharmaceutical  organizations,

or national governments could pay an annual   fee and subscribe to the MMER mapping      program.
These  agencies  or organizations could then directly utilize MMER's maps,
                                                                              or sweep MMER's
database (with the   information rendered anonymous for the      privacy of the user) to extract

information  to help make their medical supply chain  increasingly reflective of reported need, or

to inform the Ministry of Health and national   government of the location, amount and type     of

medical need during the recovery  phase. The subscription fee and crisis maps would  in turn allow
for these key actors to help
                              offset the costs of the MMER system for the     primary user - the
disaster affected community.







                                                                                               71
Kira Intrator


6.4 Assumptions   and  Dependencies

One    of  the   most   fundamental

technical  needs   of MMER      is an

IVR system. IVR is a telephony

system    that   allows   callers  to

interact  with   a computer     using                                  I\

voice   (speech   recognition)  or a

telephone  keypad or touch-tone.    A

caller's query  can be responded to              local                                 high impact

by  following    the  IVR   dialogue.         emergency                                 volunteers

The system    is pervasive  and in its
                                          Figure 24: The IVRSystem is central to MMER's   structure
simplest form   can be found in small

businesses with   automated attendant   responses, where   the caller is automatically  transferred to an

extension  without   the need for   a live operator  or receptionist.  IVR  is also used in   credit card

companies   or  banks to help direct  the caller to the  correct service  representative, to provide the

caller with   up-to-date  information   about their  account,  or to  offer them    with  a pre-recorded

message   that addresses their  query. IVR technology     is often deployed   to help manage    large call

volumes,   and to decrease   up-front  costs for the company    (as the inquiries  can be responded     to

without  the need of incurring   the cost of a liveagent, who   can  instead be freed  todeal with more

complex    interactions).   In addition    IVR   systems    enable   users  to   obtain  data   relatively

anonymously     (e.g. clinics use IVR to   allow callers to gain  access to test  results anonymously).

The IVR system      can also  be used to collect  information   via survey   form, in  which the user   is

prompted to respond     to answer questions   either verbally or by punching    the numbers   in a touch-

tone  phone. The    system selected   for MMER     (and hence   the system that    MMER is     dependent

upon)  is the Interactive Voice Response    system  'Tropo'.





















                                                                                                       72
Kira Intrator





                   MMER &IVR System Architecture



                                                           2                                 4
                             BQ1
                          Mobile Phone


                                                                       Intemde
                                                         V       SDatabase                  Server
                          Quest ions IVRed by

      Userst allers
                                        *proate                        intent  Rspcilits to



                          LandinPhone                Mcchcal
                                                    Rosponders           A






Figure 25: MMERIVR Architecture


In the case of MMER, as illustrated in the Figure  25, the IVR system architecture allows the user

to call using either a mobile phone or a landline(step 1). This call is connected to and received by

the IVR platform (step 2), which   is essentially a server and operating system hardware on which

the IVR system runs. The server      recognizes spoken input (voice recognition), which it then
translates into text
                    to speech (TTS) information as an output. This output is then transferred and
conveyed to the MMER responder through a database (step 3) . The
                                                                       IVR application (in the case
of MMER it is 'Tropo') then controls and responds to      the calls on the IVR platform, gathering

information and transferring the calls to the MMER responders (step 3). Finally, there is a need

for a programmable interface that adheres  to the application program interface standards, and that

exchanges information    among modules to facilitate    the connection,   or chaining, of backend

services. The technology that currently responds to this need is an XML/PHP backend      server that

includes a database that captures the information received, storing    it and transferring it to the

medical responders to provide them with a basic patient profile (step 4).




Selection of IVR Application

I chose  to use
                Tropo   (see Figure 26: architectural stacks comparing    Tropo  to two alternative
leading IVR   systems - Asterisk and Tellme Networks) because Tropo
                                                                            has an in-built speech




                                                                                                 73
Kira Intrator


recognition program    in twenty-four  languages and    a hardware transparency    layer which   allows

the developer to focus on the program itself. In      addition, Tropo was easier to learn, navigate,

program   and code, therefore  reducing development    time. During  development   it was also simpler

to install and execute MMER from      an independent  server.



Similar to the other programs   in the architecturalstack comparison,   Tropo is based  on Voice Over

Internet Protocol (VoIP)   - or in layman's   terms - a phone   service over the internet. Voice Over
                                  4
Internet Protocol   lowers  costs' , as itis much cheaper    than traditional  phone   services, which
could be held in monopolies or be in the hands of government entities. For VoIP to work,

analog' 5phone   signals need to be  turned into  digital signalsover the internet. VoIP can   work in

regions with   broadband    or those that   have internet  access or   digital telephone  towers,   and

functions  with more    recent digital cell towers such   as the digital and  data transport  enabling

Global System    for Mobile  Communications     standard (GSM) rather   than the omnipresent   original

old copper   wire public  switched telephone    network  (PSTN) system,    which only   carries analog

voice  data, and is unable to carry digital data.The limitation  of Tropo is that although  it supports

Session  Initiation Protocol   trunking (SIP),  which creates   a single  conduit for voice   and data
                                              into a single line), eliminating  the need   for separate
(blending connections    of  voice and data
media for each mode (Waxer,     VoIP News), Tropo's SIP system doesn't always function properly,

as evidenced  by problems   such  as Trans-Atlantic echo.



Therefore,  to enable  Tropo to be   more robust and   have a back-up   to its SIP support, part of the

mapping   analysis  in Chapter 7  includes the identification of regions that have VoIP    and internet

access  capacity to   further strengthen   and enable   Tropo's   system to have    further reach   and

resilience, and to ensure 'species  diversification';that there is more than one type of hardware,   or
provider  on hand upon   which the MMER      system can depend.















14Familiar exampleof VoIP to VoIP connectionis Skype which enables users to essentially do incalls for free
(ora sunkcostgiveninternetervicecharges).
15Every thing we heaincluding human speech is in analog form.



                                                                                                     74
                                                                                                                                                                             75




































                                                                                   rm

                                                                                   at


                                                                                   0
......
..

...........
...

                                                                                k

                                                                                giP


                                                                                                 ,





                                                                                P
                                                                                                               tms

                                                                                                               Sy                       ytm

                                                                                                               IR
                                                                                                                                        V



                                                                                                               paig
                                                                                                                                        coprn
                                                                                itlhit.I
                                                                                4




                                                                                                               AcitcurlStcso

                                                                                                               6

                                                                                                 A C

                                                                                                               Fiue
                                                                                                                                       ArterualSck
                                                                                                                                       6


                  Intrator
                                                                                                                                       Figure
                  Kira
Kira Intrator




Technical Constraints


The technical limitations of Tropo is two-fold. Tropo is ideal as a proof of concept system and to

undertake usability studies. However it is constrained by its lack of scalability and robustness to
handle thousands of calls (Dr. Steve Chan, interview, March 2012). Second, when
                                                                                     compared to
Asterisk, Tropo has more limitations in its ability to connect       to the legacy network and

omnipresent public switched   telephone network (PSTN) system, whereas Asterisk does so with

more  resilience and robustness (Dr. Steve Chan, interview, March 2012). Asterisk's modular and

open source architecture (or 'development platform' approach in which the architect can create

his/her own voice communication server) allows it to interoperate more readily with standards-
based telephony equipment.



Another potential constraint  is the ubiquity of mobile phones and the speed of change from

analog to digital, GSM, and 3G to   4G. Therefore,  MMER is structured in a modular fashion; in

other words general parameters and technological needs are outlined and the corresponding
current technologies are selected. However, the technologies selected (e.g., Tropo,having MMER

be voice-enabled, the absence   of photo/video diagnosis) are due to current infrastructure, costs,

cell phone tower capabilities in developing countries, and needs,   rather than in anticipation of

future mobile phone penetration, increased access to bandwidth    and data, decreased cell phone

costs, and increasingly sophisticated cell phone models. Thus the limitation of the current system
design is that the technology selected could be dated in five to ten years, but its advantage is its

modular nature. Thus there is a distinction made between general parameters and functional needs

(such as the need for a routing system that handles large call volumes alow cost) and the specific

current technologies employed (like the IVR system 'Tropo').


A final technical constraint would be that access to mobile cell phone towers
                                                                                may be limited or
restricted due to damage post-disaster (even during     reconstruction). However, as previously

stated, at that time cell phone towers/mobile phone lines would be running prior to landlines.

Given post-disaster limitations on resources, money, and electricity the user would likely need to

make calculated trade-off's and careful decisions as to if - or when - they use MMER, as the

system would tap into their cell phone battery and phone credit.








                                                                                                76
Kira Intrator



Next  Steps
Having established   the structure, core   purpose and mechanics of MMER,         in addition to

elucidating the user cycle and the technical dependencies of the MMER system, we are prepared

to receive feedback from disaster relief and technology professionals on the concept and

implementation of the telephony system. Furthermore, we will layout the structure of MMER's

pilot test and hone in on and conduct a site selection analysis of where MMER could function, be

used, and have its value maximized in Haiti.





















































                                                                                               77
         7. EXPERT      INTERVIEWS,       SITE SELECTION         & SURVEY DESIGN


Interviews were carried out with four expert humanitarian    disaster relief professionals, each of

whom brought to the fore a different set of experiences, skills, and perspectives. The goal of the

interviews was to get grounding and feedback from experts with deep field experience in disaster

relief and recovery in the implementation and use    of humanitarian technologies, and to obtain

critical feedback on the MMER concept.


The second segment of this chapter (as  of section 7.2)moves from the vetting of MMER and      the

insights provided  through the expert interviews, to the design and  construction of a pilot study

that consists of a GIS-grounded     site selection analysis and a usability survey    design. The
                                         structure of the pilot study,rovide a framework for the
interviews, combined   with the plan and
third and final stage of research   for MMER: pilot/usability studies, scalability   analysis, and

technological testing that in sum will allow for MMER to be    implemented, and for its impact  to

be realized.



7.1 Interviews


Background   Information  on Expert Interviews

My first interviewee   is Jennifer Chan    (August, 2011), an author    of Harvard Humanitarian

Initiativeand UNOCHA's joint report     on Disaster Relief 2.0:The Future ofInformation    Sharing

(2011). In this report Ms. Chan  focuses on the use of humanitarian  technologies in the aftermath

of Haiti's disaster; in additionMs. Chan served as    a medical practitioner in one of the largest
rehabilitation field hospitalsn Haiti post-disaster (inanuary and March 2010).    She thus brought

to bear both direct humanitarian medical aid experience  and a technological  understanding  of the

relief efforts. Ms. Chan   knew how to use    open source disaster  relief technology  (which she

carried out forUshahidi) for evaluation, inaddition to her research focus on the interfacebetween

volunteer and  technicalcommunities   with humanitarian  agencies.


The  second  interviewee  is Nigel Snoad, who    has a unique  background   in both disaster relief
technology   creation and dissemination,  having  worked   in Microsoft  in crisis communication

development,   and as current Director of Google's  disasterrelief technology  unit.Dr. Snoad has

more than a   decade of field  experience  in disaster recovery as  the Information  Management



                                                                                                78
Strategy Advisor of the United Nation's Office  for Coordinated Humanitarian Affairs, and as the

head  of the United Nations Joint Logistics Center mission   to Indonesia during the 2004-2005

Tsunami   response.


Third is Jacobo Quintanilla,   the Humanitarian Director for Internews, who    not only has vast

experience dealing   with disaster recovery communications within Haiti, but     also provides a
nuanced   understanding of crisis communication, and the power of,   and need for, the voices of

locals to be heard through local media.


Finally there is Jemilah Mahmood,     the former Chief of the Humanitarian Response    Branch of

the United Nations     Population Fund (UNFPA), who oversaw the agencies'             emergency

preparedness in addition to humanitarian and recovery responses     in both complex and natural

disasters. Ms. Mahmood brings a unique community-centered         approach, through which she
promotes capacity building as a critical component for continued community      preparedness and

resilience in the face of natural disasters.


Medical Feedback and Implementation       of MMER - Jennifer Chan


The  main themes that emerged from the interview with Jennifer Chan     were: first, the dynamics

and changes of clinical capacity on the ground and the    technology used within this field, and
second, feedback on the implementation       of MMER. With respect to the first, Ms. Chan

highlighted that measuring the  feasibility of a clinical activity on the ground was not simply a

clinicalmatter, but also involved logistics. For example, one of the major  obstacles and issues

Ms. Chan raised was the dynamics of knowing the existing abilities of     medical clinics on the

ground (so as to properly transfer patients, and to accurately suggeclinics to patients for follow-

up treatment). She explained that the capacity, services, and resources of clinics in Haiti, with
respect to medications, human   resources, and structural ability, changed weekly. There was no

reliable way to know or to  understand "what the actual resources (in the clinics) were because

they were so dynamic" (Jennifer Chan, Interview, August 2011).



With respect to the use of disaster relief technology, Ms. Chanstated that the technology that she
utilized the most and thought worked the best, (especially    in her position as patient transfer

coordinator, among other jobs) was the  Open Street Map application. The reason she thought it

functioned well in the field wasbecause "it was simple, and easy to find". Simplicity thus reigned

over "high resolution satellite imagery(which) would have had no use.. .it would just have been

noise.. .knowing that there was a bush in a certain location would not have been that useful"


                                                                                              79
(Chan,  Interview, 2011).  Ms. Chan  thus stresses that theusability, simplicity and applicability of

the disaster relieftechnology   was of  the highest  import, above those  with higher   resolution or

more  sophisticated technology  (i.e.,rowd sourced   data over satelliteimagery  for map  rendering).
As a health provider, clinician and  manager  of operations at her fieldhospital, Ms. Chan  was also

sensitive to the issues of interoperabilityand  profusion of technology.  Ms.  Chan highlighted   this

issue as a realchallenge:  "what I noticed was  that many  people were  creating  many technologies

all at once (e.g., patienttracking systems)".  However  it wasn't for lack of quality of the concept

or idea, but rather the lack of interoperability and integration thatwas an obstacle   - "there were
amazing   ideas but they were  not coordinated   together; allof a sudden  things were   cropping  up

leftand right... They were   just causing plumes  of information  from  which it  was challenging  to

cull or tomake decisions   from." (Chan,  Interview, 2011)


Feedback   on the MMER    System

                                                                                     have during  the
Ms.  Chan suggests   that the types of cases or needs that  MMER patients    would
recovery  phase  of disasterrelief would  be for on-going  physical therapy  or consideration for the

removal  of external  fixators (i.e., post-amputation guidance  and  care). More specifically,  Chan

stated that the best types of case studies or pilot tests which coincidentally   were coded  into the

MMER     prototype  - were cases   for cholera,diarrhea, and help  with follow-up   amputation  care.

Other  types of   case studies  that Chan   suggested  testing  for were  child  malnutrition, lower
respiratory tract infection (she noted that  she often sees pneumonia    cases in post-disaster crisis

situations),and  obstetricscare. More  specifically,in the case of obstetricscare Chan  saw cases  of

"impending   labor and  post partum  hemorrhage".  In cases such as these Chan   stresses thatwhat is

of import  is "matching  resources  with the request". Thus  Chan recommends     that these calls and

firststage diagnoses  also be coordinated  with hospitals, clinics, andresources  on the ground.  For
example   Chan  describes that "if there is a childwith diarrhea who  is not alertor interactive" the

system could   match the caller and find "an existing clinicthat most  matches  the resources needed

for the  patient, like the pediatric hospital  St. Damiens,  in Haiti." This  harks back   to Chan's

original  suggestion  - that  MMER     could provide   criticalmedical   information,  referrals, and

suggestions,  but it alsocould potentially provide and match   the callerwith the ever-changing   and
          resources and clinics present on the ground.
dynamic


An element   that was  both vital inher experience  as clinicianand in her  feedback  of MMER    was

that of setting expectations  for the patient,or in the case of MMER,     the caller.She  highlighted

that settingthe caller'sexpectations  isessential, asa "lack of clarity leadsto.. .unexpected effects,



                                                                                                   80
whether it is a lack of response or a      lack of information provided...it inevitably leads to

frustration." Therefore Chan suggests that       both the messaging     within the call and the

campaigning for MMER set expectations of     "what can and cannot be done with the tool at hand."

She further states that in her experience "this [method] has had positive results". As  outlined in
the system design of MMER,     both the messaging within the user cycle when the call is activated,

and the outreach  and marketing of MMER clarifies MMER's role and sets the user's expectations

to what type  ofinformation (rather than a final diagnosis) the call can provide.



Finally, in order to optimize MMER's infrastructure and the results it would provide, Chan
suggests training the volunteer clinician responders in
                                                               Disaster  Relief operations.   Chan
highlighted that the best type of physicians  MMER could host were those who, in addition to

having an MD, would have        field experience and/or a Masters in Public Health. Moreover

"providing trainings (in disaster relief operations) would really maximize the volunteer   medical

community," by giving    them an awareness of "other realities, not only in developing portions of

the world, but in general humanitarian disaster relief settings."


In summary, Chan was very supportive of MMER and stated that it has "great potential" and      that

"I definitely see potential for how MMER could be integrated" into          post-disaster recovery

operations. With respect to future work and testing of MMER, Chan      mentioned that "one of the

things that I found very helpful in other types (of disaster relief technologies) - for example the
work I did for Ushahidi across sectors - is exactly whatyou are doing: writing a proof of concept,

doing pilots, then examining the non-technical side of how these things work." The pilot survey

presented in the latter part of this chapter, serves this purpose: it will examine the user base, their

needs,   and  provide   feedback on the MMER          service. Furthermore,   to merge     "human

communication systems with technology" Chan underscores that "what is remarkable         is finding
out what can   or cannot be done   earlier on,and that is what you are doing - talking to other

groups, seeing what has worked,  what has not" (Chan, Interview, 2011).



Overview

Ms. Chan provided medical perspectives and ground truths for MMER.         As illustrated in Figure

27 (see branch section  under 'Jennifer Chan') she discussed  the need to set callers' expectations,

and the need for MMER's volunteer      responders to be trained in disaster relief operations. The

remaining three interviews helped bring to light key themes   (see Figure 27), specifically around
the use of humanitarian technologies
                                       and MMER. These themes can be categorized as follows:


                                                                                                81
disaster relieftrends and  challenges (Dr.  Snoad), the role of technology  in a disaster reliefsetting

(Quintanilla), and community    involvement   (Mahmood)    (see Figure 27).






























































                                                                                                     82
                                                                                                                                                                                 83




                                                                                                            workers)

                                                                                      Relief Workers)
                                                                                                            relief
                                                                                                            &
                                                                                      Disaster
                                                                                      &

                                                                                      urity                 rdmunities
                                                                                                            co

                                                                         si'tal       ommi
                                                                                      C                               Too~s,
                                                                                      (by
                                                                                                            affected
                                                                         enough  Tool                       (by
                                                                         not     of   Tools
                                                    Clinics                           of
                                                    in
                                                                         noise, Usability
                                                                                                            Behaviour {Familior/Generic)
                                                           technologies
                                                    ChangesDR            much                       Nigel
                                                           of                         Discoverobi"000  SnoodSeeking
                                                                         Ioo
                                                                                                            Into                Democratizationpfforols
                                                    Resource                                                          Repurposing



                                                    Frequent
                                                           Overabundance
                                                                                Challenges                                 Trends


                                                                                                                           TeCh
                                                                                iech


                                                                   0
                                                                                )             Relie

                                         HARHUMANTTATIAN
                                                                                              1isavtcrp
                                                   Jennifer

                                                                                                                                    in
...........

                                                                                                                                    Tech
                                                                                                                                    of

                                                        Feedback
                                                                                                                                    Role
                                                                                                involvement

                                                        MMER

                                                                                                                                       trust


                                                         Pilot                                  community            communicate
                                                 caller  e        onders                                             to                Oslblah                  Relief Expert
                                                                                                                                                      Comsmuniale
                                                 for     Futur    respc                                                                               &
                                                         &
                                                                                                                                                      ten
                                                                                    octors)                          capacity                         Lis
                                                         Studies                                                                  icha nrome     risonto        Disaster
                                                                  volunteer         local
                                                 expectations     of                          &olutions skewed                    o
                                                 Set     Case              Engagemenby                  is           enhances     Int                 Need      with
                                                                  oning
                                                         col      I                                                  &ut
                                                         C                          snored
                                                                                              knoweldge              Myue
                                                                           Community                    cstribution
                                                                                    ITech
                                                                                                        Power        soLve                                      Interviews
                                                                                    Local                            not                                        of
                                                                                              Uselocol
                                                                                    Att       &                                          INT[RNEQuintanilla
                                                                                                                     Does
                                                                                              Find      PorCris
                                                                                    Global
                                                                                              Seek
                                                                                    ink                                                                         Summary
                                                         *             Jemilsh      T
                                                                           Mahmood                                                                              27:
                                                         *


                                                         *                                                                                                      Figure
Disaster Relief Technologv Trends - Ni2el Snoad


In an interview conducted on July 2011 with Dr. Nigel Snoad, he stated that one of the most

interesting trends was the "democratization of tools", in which you get non-professionals setting

up and making use of sophisticated tools quite quickly.       One such example was a Haitian

businessman setting up Noula, and the    formation of community-based crisis maps with accurate
depictions of camp   settlements that integrated and used simple spreadsheets, maps,    and  social

networking tools like Facebook (Wall, 2011).        One   of the foundational   issues Dr. Snoad

underscored was how to make disaster relief technology both usable and discoverable    (see Figure

27) so that individuals like the small businessman in Haiti could  make use of, and leverage that

same technology in a creative   and impactful manner. In the generation of new humanitarian aid

technology,  Dr. Nigel Snoad states that usability is massively    under-thought   with respect to
design,  and that there is a general absence of user feedback and usability studies in the

dissemination of new tools, thus limiting their use and adoption    (Nigel Snoad, Interview, July

2011).



Conversely,   there  exists the issue of discoverability    for humanitarian    aid workers and

professionals who seek to 'discover' the information and tools that are being generated by the
affected communities and citizens on the ground. Thus the system of discoverability is not simply

one in which affected communities seek to find what is being generated by           disaster relief

agencies (i.e., a top-down approach) but is also a problematic   that exists from the 'bottom-up'

where technologists and relief workers seek and try to    find what innovations and information

creation are happening on the ground.      Hence Haitian citizens   started to have technological

avenues for the amplification of their voice and expression, through  both the democratization  of
technology and through the repurposing of existing    tools.Yet a complicating  factor was that of

"too  much noise,   and not  enough signal" - in other    words that   there was an overload of

information  with neither a filter for prioritizationnor a framework for controlling   the quality,

type, and often the source of incoming in-field information. Moreover, this unfiltered information

overload was compounded by the fact that "there is still very little standardization of disaster

relief tools" (Snoad, Interview, July 2011) so that the stream of informationbeing generated was
not only of varying quality, but also of varyingformat and type.



According   to Snoad, another   truism  of disaster relief technology applications  is that "in an

emergency people fall back on the tools that they use everyday." Thus repurposing existing tools




                                                                                                84
becomes key, rather than the false assumption that "if you build it, yourusers will come." (Snoad,

July 2011, interview). Hence Dr. Snoad believes that what ultimately 'wins' orwill be utilized in

emergency and disaster relief responses are generic systems that individuals already know how to

use. With respect to repurposing in the case of MMER,      Snoad believes that the success of call

centers utilized by the Red Cross for camp operations and displaced populations in Haiti, could be
translated into the success and the   launch of MMER (as a medical type of call center and

information management system). Snoad underscores that in his experience the Red Cross call

center in Haiti "worked extremely well", as did those he witnessed in Sri Lanka a few years prior

- "We keep doing these call centers (where communities affected by disaster can call in and pose

general questions to the agency), and it keeps being very successful. But we keep being terrified
to do it - of exposing ourselves to criticism. It was shown to be very valuableto the communities

it served, to serving them   and their queries. I still don't understand why it is  not a standard

operation in relief efforts" (Snoad, Interview, July 2011)



In line with Ms. Chan's suggestion, Dr. Snoad suggests that the next steps for future work and
testing of MMER would be to prove that there is a value gain for the users (e.g., shortening wait

time in clinics, increasing the accuracy of diagnoses, providing life-enhancing and life-saving

information). In addition, Dr. Snoad suggests both field-testing and showing that MMER can

work both culturally and technologically in field. The first of these is covered by the usability

survey, which analyzes responders'    familiarity with the IVR service and their access to health
services (see Section 7.3). The second dimension - a technological proof of concept - would be

carried out through a technological trial of MMER's robustness in field. In other words, the trial

would primarily test MMER's ability to handle and route significant call volumes, utilizing

medical cases described by Dr.Chan, in the field.



The Role of Communication      Post-Disaster - Jacobo Quintanillo


Jacobo Quintanillo is the Humanitarian Director of Internews, whose mission is to "empower

local media worldwide to give people the news and information    they need, the ability to connect,
and the means to  make their voices heard" (Internews.org, website, 2012).  Their mission is based

on capacity  building for local communities, and emphasizes    the power of having the voices of

locals be heard through their own sources of media.  Undergirding Quintanillo's work is his belief

that the best form of communication "is face to face" and       that media and "technology can

enhance the capacity to communicate and listen." Quintanillo is careful to state that technology is



                                                                                                85
not the panacea: "it is not a solution, but an avenue to enhance communication". Therefore for

Quintanillo the use of technology for communication in relief situations is "fundamentally about

trust" (Jacobo Quintanillo, Interview, August 8, 2011).


When asked how one can establish trust through media or technology sources (as Quintanillo

helped establish one of the most trusted and popular daily Creole news programs in Haiti called
"Enf6masyon Nou Dwe Konnon," ENDK, or "News You Can Use"), Quintanillo responded              that

it was about building confidence     with the listener or user. One does so by "providing a

professional service and product that the user relies  upon. It must be useful, practical, timely,

accurate and relevant to build confidence and trust" (Quintanillo, Interview, August 2011).

Specifically, the form of communication that Quintanillo supports during recovery is a two-way
form of communication; one that both listens and responds to communities,   rather than a one-way

form of communication that "tells people what to do". A two-way form of communication is

about "building transparency and accountability", and for the latter to occur "we need to be able

to build up ways to effectively listen and communicate with communities." Quintanillo warns that

if we do not both listen and communicate and establish an open and transparent form of
communication    "people will disengage     from your message (or system) from day one"

(Quintanillo, Interview, August 2011).



However, Quintanillo is not unilaterally opposed to all forms of one-way messaging. He cites

advantages of this form of mass messaging at the onset of an outbreak or acute emergency

(Quintanillo is careful not to call this one-way system a form of 'communication'). Quintanillo
states that an advantage to one-way messages is that they can provide "a clear, unified message to

prevent confusion and contradictory messaging". In this vein, Quintanillo provided me with a

great idea - to integrate the provision of one-way messages (such as standardized public service

announcements)   into MMER if the caller opts out of communicating with a medical responder. In

other words, a standardized pre-recorded 'library of messages' from the United Nations Cluster
system (a project currently being built  out by the various Cluster groups, starting with water,

sanitation, and hygiene) could potentiallybe applied within MMER's IVR pre-recorded system.


Quintanillo concluded our interview with the following suggestion for MMER: "If I leave behind

one word today it is institutionalization. Make sure that someone believes in the MMER concept

and get an organization to use it, pilot it, and adopt it." Specifically he suggested organizations

such as the International Rescue Committee, M6decins Sans Frontieres, and the International
Medical Corps.



                                                                                                86
Jemilah   Mahmood - Community Involvement, Local          Knowledge and Dissemination


Jamilah Mahmood, at the time    of the interview, was Chief of the Humanitarian Response    Branch
of the United Nations Population
                                    Fund (UNFPA). "When you want to start       a system, the most
 important factor...is that thservice must be localized. I always have this philosophy - 'you can

think global, but you   must act local', and for health especially  you cannot give a diagnosis,

provide information    or advice without actually seeing someone".      Mahmood urged that for

MMER "you have to find a way that this [MMER]...       is shared by all the local actors rather than

just an external environment". Dr. Mahmood      applies this concept to the way in which   affected
populations   are treated and viewed      post-disaster  "...you  need to think 'local'
                                                                                            all the
time... affected populations are not a homogenous group.. .there are layers   of complexities and

various ethnic groups  that come into play" (Jamilah Mahmood, Interview, July   2011).



Dr. Mahmood also      believes that community engagement is key to long-term         disaster relief
preparation,  recovery and resilience. She specifies, however, that
                                                                      "community engagement is
only  useful if you can track influence.. .to see who orwhat in the community leads to influential

change  (such as policy or programmatic change), and  which voices are not being listened to." She

concludes that most often "it is the most    vulnerable that don't get their voices heard."    The

'expert blind-spot' occurs "when   individuals come in and see things from their point of view and
they are unable to see the holisticpicture and the solutions...because often the solutions
                                                                                         are found
within the community    itself." Dr. Mahmood stresses the point that the  international community

(or disaster reliefagencies) must look at the locals as being the 'prime    movers' in emergency

response, recovery  and preparedness.


Therefore the dissemination of disaster relief
                                               technology must be one that builds capacity within
the community, and     ideally integrates, identifies, and utilizes local solutionsand knowledge

(Mahmood, Interview,    2011). With respect to the form that thetechnology takes, Dr. Mahmood -

similar  to Dr. Snoad's concept of 'repurposing' the     familiar - believes that for inclusivity

purposes, using the simplest and most accessible technology is best.


Finally, similar to Dr. Snoad, Dr. Mahmood underscored the success of call centers post
                                                                                           disaster
"the call center was the only  service with one hundred per cent satisfaction rating by affected

populations." As mentioned    in both Chan and Quintanillo's interviews, Quintanilla    also states

that expectations ofthe user/caller need to be established and clarified.




                                                                                                87
Design Implications

                                                                                      the concept
Having  established the viewpoints  of four leading  Disaster Relief professionals on
and construction  of MMER,    we  must  now turn  to and summarize   their feedback  and  its effect

upon  the construction  of the  pilot teststudy,  and the  future work  in the  dissemination  and

continued  testingof MMER.



Jennifer Chan's  uses her richexperience  in working  in andhelping operate  a major field hospital
in Haiti,and  her research inmedical  needs post-disaster,to provide examples  of case studies that

could be  implemented   and tested forand by  MMER.    A  potentialdesign implication  of the post-

disaster ailments  Chan   most   frequently  observed  is that MMER's      IVR   system  could  be

specifically programmed   to handle the most frequent  of thesedisaster-induced  needs. This could

be enacted  by the IVR  system  being more  rigorously trained to pick up key words   associated to
                                             software and  to enable more  effectivetriaging at the
these ailments through  itsvoice recognition
backend  with respect to such ailments. Moreover,  Chan  provides specific medical suggestions  for

the use of MMER,   which  range  from obstetricsthrough to amputation  and pneumonia   care. These

suggestions will likely be applied in the 'technological' testing phase of the MMER system,

which  willtest therobustness  of thetechnological components   of MMER,    while utilizingspecific
                                                                                 usability studies.
case  studies and  medical  scenarios  to dive  deeper into user feedback   and
Moreover,   she mentions  thatthe volunteer  responders must  be trained in disasterrelieflogistics

and  scenarios - an element  that will be added  to the overarching sustainable business  plan and

management    strategyof the MMER    system.


                                                                                       be adopted,
Quintanillo  underscores  the importance  of 'institutionalizing'MER     so thatit can
piloted, and streamlined   within  the operations  of an  established and respected   international

medical  reliefagency. I will utilizehis suggestion inmy partnership  analysis within my  business

plan  for MMER.     In addition, Quintanillo  suggests tapping  into the United   Nation  Cluster's

'library of messages'  - an  idea that fits inperfectly with MMER's     menu  option  to conduct  a

voice-activated medical  search of pre-recorded messages  (see Figure 23, p.62).


Both  Chan  and Dr. Mahmood    highlight the need to setexpectations for the use of MMER    for the

user/caller.This is reflectedand implemented   intothe system  design of MMER    through the front-

end  automated  'welcome'  message   imbedded  within the IVR  system, in addition to the format of

the outreach  initiatives.




                                                                                                 88
An important perspective upheld   by both Chan and Dr. Mahmood is that the MMER        service must

fit and match   with the realitiesof the ever-changing   and dynamic resources    of clinics on  the

ground. This  is addressed by having users   - such as having local in-field  nurses and doctors   -

calling in to use MMER's services (e.g., potentially conduct a medical search on the pre-recorded

medical topics etc.) Further, the idea of having MMER provide a match for the caller to a clinic
on the ground is reflected in the system design as the caller having the ability to request a location

of a service provision facility such as nearby clinic or camp. The information for the live medical

practitioner to provide the caller with the nearest clinic is thereforelready present. Future work

can  be done to improve this functionality, for example by      creating an automatic weekly call

through the IVR system to collect basic   information on the human and medical resources clinics
currently have on hand.



Dr. Snoad's framework of      usability, discoverability, and repurposing has been   applied to the

design of MMER. The survey design and questions begin        to address the issue of usability (i.e.,

the challenge  that the majority of disaster relief technologiesdo not undertake usability studies).
Second,   the issue of discoverability was covered in the     design of 'outreach' initiatives and

strategies in the design   of MMER. Third, the     concept of 'repurposing'    could be considered

addressed with prior   exposure and experience  with IVR technology (with    calling banks or small

businesses) and with  the prior exposure to general call centersby users.


                                 Mahmood and Dr. Snoad's      underscore the success of  call centers
With  regard to call centers, Dr.
in post-disaster situations. They both agreed  that theinformation hot-line or call center concept,

implemented post-disaster    by international agencies  in both the 2005 Tsunami,     and in Haiti's

2011 earthquake,    generated high satisfaction   ratings by recipients   of the service (i.e., the

communities   served), yet both Dr. Mahmood    and Dr. Snoad stated  that the idea of call centersas

a reoccurring  practice had yet to be made a standard, and   scaled in disaster relief logistics.ey
further related the role that call centersad played in the past, to the potentialMMER could     play

in the future.



With  respect to the future implementation and testing of MMER,    Chan affirmed that the path that

MMER is currently     pursuing is one that will help ensure a robust proof of concept   and 'test'to
help ensure  MMER's success.    Chan  stated that forMMER, this    would include  writing a proof of

concept, setting  up a pilot test (or tests),xamining   the non-technical  dimensions  of MMER's

implementation   and interviewing  other experts to examine post-disaster  conditions and needs,  in



                                                                                                  89
addition to researching   disaster relief technologies to see what has or has not worked    on the

ground.


Finally, Mahmood's     'think global, but act local' is embodied in the usability   survey design,

which serves to examine    a specific communities' access and use of mobile phones,     health care

services, and feedback  on the MMER concept.

7.2 SiteSelection/GIS Criteria



Having collected, evaluated, and culled feedback    on MMER from disaster relief professionals
with deep     field experience   in post-disaster  medicine, technology,     communications
                                                                                               and
community engagement initiatives, we now     turn tothe pilot study of MMER. As underscored by

Dr.Mahmood, disaster relief technology such as MMER       needs to be localized (i.e., adapted to the

needs of the local culture and needs) in addition tbeing location- and context-specific.


In order to allow for a context-specific roll-out of MMER, an overlay of various data on Haiti -

through geospatial  exclusion - will be carried out to determine if the technical needs and voice-

enabled advantage   of MMER are met. This will be done to locate a site-specific region   in which

MMER can function       and best be utilized in Haiti. To analyze the technical    robustness and

functionality of MMER, geo-referencing data and maps of two leading cell     phone companies and
tower locations in addition to back-up Internet access by 'department' was mapped and overlaid

in GIS (Geographic Information Systems). Second,    as illustrated in the site selection map (Figure

28), Haiti's literacy levels (recorded from Haiti's most recent census of 2003) are divided into

and mapped onto Haiti's nine     departments ("ddpartements") to further define Haiti's spatial

distribution of literacy. Specifically, the three departments with the lowest literacy levels  are
Grand-Anse    and Sud-Est,  with adult literacy
                                                levels of 37%, and the department     of Centre at
42.4%   literacy, closely followed by Artibonite at 44.8% (with the most pronounced    gender gap

being in 'Centre' with 33.6% literacy for adult women, and 42.4%   for men).



Finally, to find both the location for the pilot, andto understand the context in which MMER
would and could function within, local needs, culture and
                                                            existing health-service access need to
be identified and understood    (Jamilah Mahmood, Interview, 2011). This will be conducted

through the creation of a four-partsurvey (see section 7.3) that will be distributed and completed

in the selected region.




                                                                                                90
Regions  of Interest:


As illustrated in Figure 28, for technical specifications, and to ensurethe resiliency of MMER's

application in Haiti, I selected Digicel and Voila - the two biggest telecom companies  in Haiti for

current and redundant cell phone coverage data. Access Haiti, a major internet company was also
mapped to provide back-end support and robustness for the IVR/Tropo system that MMER is

currently built upon. I finally examined and highlighted areas of high illiteracy, and circled the

three regions of highest interest (i.e., regions that displatechnical robustness and resiliency for

MMER     in addition to high illiteracy rates):

     -   In the 'Sud' department (near Les Caynes) there is current internet coverage (Access
         Haiti) in addition to Voila and Digicel network coverage and literacy rates below 50%
     *   In the 'Artibonite' department    both  the centers of Saint-Marc    and  Gonavies have
         redundant cell phone coverage and Access Haiti Internet access.
     -   Given the department of Grand
                                         D'Anse's historically high illiteracy levels (at 63% adult
         illiteracy) and its redundant cell phone coverage, in addition to Access Haiti's plans for
         'future' coverage of the city of Jeremie, I would select this as a third possible site to
         carry out a pilot study.






































                                                                                                 91
                                                                                            KiraIntrator

                                    MMER Haiti Site Selection





                                                      N              st































          Legend

                AdministrativeBoundaries             VoilaCellPhone  Service    Adult Literacy Levels %

                DigicelCell Phone Coverage                 Future VoilaCoverage        No Data
                                        Access Haiti       Actual VoilaCoverage        1 -50
           A    Future InternetCoverage,
           A    Actual InternetCoverage,Access Haiti                                   51 - 60

                                                                                       61 -70

                                                                  Source:
                                                                  Administrativendaries
                                                                  MIN USTAH, UN StabiviZationMission in Haiti;
                                                                  DigicelHaiti Coverage-GeoCommons,2010;
                                                                  AccessHaiti Internetcoverage-AccessHaiti;
                                                                  Iiterag Rates -IHSI, 2003.

                                                                  I'oiServiceCellCoverag'oila.c2011




Figure 28: Site Selection Map, Haiti.










                                                                                                            92
 7.3 In-field Study & Survey



 Having selected three regions   of interest in which the pilot would be carried out,   we now turn to
                                                                                                      16
 the objective, methodology,    and structure of the survey/study that will be   conducted in Haiti .
 The survey is a mixture   of quantitative profile and demographic information,
                                                                                    and includes open-
 ended questions in addition  to multiple-choice questions on health care   access.



The initial pilot survey   and project objective is twofold: first,  to assess the target population's

 access and  use of mobile phone technology, and second, to assess     their access to medical services

and health  care (the latter is a suggestion provided by Dr.  Snoad; Interview, July 2011). After the

pilot  survey is complete, processed, and analyzed,      user  feedback  on the MMER       concept  and
application  will be collected during the technological    testing phase with the complete prototype

of  the MMER application (See Appendix One          for sample questionnaire, and Chapter Eight      for

timeline).   At the front-end, basic demographic     and quantitative profile data will be collected

from the interviewee, including     age, gender, level  of literacy, living situation (e.g., temporary,

camp, permanent), and location     of residence. The demographic data will not only    provide context

as to the interview sample,     but will enable us to break down and compare         the feedback and
information provided by
                           markers such as age, gender, or level of literacy.  This will be conducted
first by understanding   the survey interviewees' current use     of mobile technology, and then by

examining whether individuals would benefit        from MMER. The survey methodology          (i.e., the

way in which the assessments will be made)       will be to determine the individual's general   health

concerns and access to health   care, and their experience with technology; specifically   with regard

to their use of mobile  phones and prior experience with IVR systems.


Prior to conducting
                       the survey with one or more people,      the research member will obtain an
informed   verbal consent from the interviewee. Verbal   survey data will be collected (as opposed
                                                                                                     to
having interviewees fill out the surveys      by hand) to ensure that illiterate or semi-illiterate

individuals have equal access and    ability to understand and complete the survey, with     the verbal

dialogue taking no more than thirty   minutes.



However, key elements     and decisions on the implementation of the     survey would be determined
at the time
             of the pilot, as they would be dependent on the partner     organization or institute that

16The final selectiof the pilot swill be dependeon external factors
                                                                 such as fundinfeasibility, aestablished
partnershipsAll three selected areas fit the requirements and needs study. pilot


                                                                                                     93
              out  and manage   the  survey  in-field.These  considerations  include:  the type  of
would   carry
recruitment  methods   used  to obtain  the survey   responders,  the incentives  or remuneration

provided  to interviewees  (e.g.,payment  or non-payment),   and an  understanding  of the type of

access, relationship(and trust)the fieldpartner has with the responders and community    members.

Below  is an overview  of thesurvey  structureand its objectives:



                                    Suriv   & Resuarch  Tite:
              AsiSSSSMENTI  O  CORRE  NT ANI)  PO1NIAI   -I  ISESF MO  II    PIIHONE
                                                    .ANI)HAI   I'1CARE   SEAvICTS.
              TE   IlNOLOGY  FOR  MIA     i ACCESS

          Segment  of thePopulation  I wish to includein my study:
          The criteria for subject selection include that the research subjects are: (a)

          approximately 50% men and 50% women (from a total sample size of 50),
          (b) that the individuals are illiterater semi-literate,(c) that they must  be
          over  the age  of 30 (to help  determine  technology  access  and  those who
          might  typically  not be  as familiar  with  texting). The  participants will
          verbally agree  to bein the study; the Committee   on the Use  of Humans   as

          Experimental  Subjects  (COUHES)    regulations and requirements  will be met
          and followed.

          Survey  Objective:

                  Assess  Current Use  of Mobile Technology.  Do the interviewees  own
                  or rent theirmobile phones?  How   accessibleis theirmobile  phone?
                  Do they  feelat ease using a mobile phone  (and in what
                  capacity/use)? What   isthe primary use of theirmobile phone?   How

                  does  technology  fitnto theirlife?
               -  Assess  Access to Health Care  What  isthe interviewee's current
                   access to healthcare?How   do they access healthcare? Whom   do
                  they see to address theirhealth issues?

                  Assess  whether or not the interviewees would  benefitfrom MMER.
                   How,  or inwhat circumstances  do they see themselves  using an
                   applicationlike MMER?    Do they  have feedback  forthe concept,
                   ideaor design of MMER?




                    survey adapted  three questions on  health care access from  New   York  City's
The  MMER     pilot
Community    Health  Survey  (Community    Health  Survey, 2010,  NYC   Department   of Health  and

Mental   Hygiene,  Bureau  of Epidemiology   Services, New   York 7). Examples   of these questions

are as follows:

     1.Question - Wouldyousay thatn generalourhealthis excellent,r/averagepoor?


 17 NYC Community Health Survey, 2010 (NYC CHS), CHS Coordinator, NYC Department of Healthand Mental
 HygieneBureau of Epidemiologyervices125Worth Street,oom 315,CN-6 New  York,New York 10013




                                                                                                 94
     2. Question - Do you have one personor more thaone personyou think of as your personal doctor or hecare
          provider?
              a.   INTERVIEWER PROBE IF "YES": Do you have only one      or more thanone?
     3. Question - Do you have a doctor or other health care provider you see reguyou are ill or need a
          checkup?


 The survey also used as a reference a National       Science Foundation study research protocol and

 technology assessment model (Bagozzi,      1992)technique used by the Mixed Emerging Technology

 Lab at the University of Central      Florida in a study they conducted in Haiti in 2011         to assess

 mobile technology use and      inter-agency coordination. Finally, the survey structure,       length, and

 questions were reviewed     and vetted by an MIT Community Innovator's Lab affiliate         based out of

 Port au Prince, Haiti.



 Sample  Survey


                                            I. Demographics1   8




 1. What is your gender?
                                 __Male

                                     Female
                                  ___Other


2.   What is your age?


                                      18-20
                                      21-30

                                      31-40
                                      41-50

                                      51-60
                                      61-70

                                  ___More than    70



3.   Can you read orwrite in Creole?
                   i.  ___Yes, I can read and write in Creole
                  ii.  __Somewhat,     I can read signs and numbers

                  iii.  _  No.

4.   Can you read orwrite in French?

                   i.  ___Yes, I can read and write in French


18 The structure  of the 'Demographics'    survey section  was taken
                                                                       from, and based   upon the
University of Central Florida's    Mobile Phone analysis survey, supported by the National Science
Foundation, 2011.



                                                                                                         95
                   ii. __Somewhat,       I can read  signs in French
                  iii. _     No.


5.   Are you an original     resident  of this department     or did you move here      from elsewhere?
                    i. ___Yes,   original resident
                   ii. ____No, I moved     from another region    of Haiti to here


6.   What   is your residence    type

                    i. ____Ilive in a refugee camp
                   ii. ____Ilive  in a temporary   settlement
                  iii. __I   live in a permanent/rebuilt    house
                  iv.


                                      II. Cell Phone Access & Usage



1.   Do you have access to a phone

                    i.  ___Yes,  I own one
                   ii. _Yes,     I rent one
                  iii. ____Yes,  my family owns one and      we share it

                  iv.  _No
                   v.  ___Other    (explain)

2. Do you use cell phones?

                    1.      Yes
                   ii.      No
         b. If YES, how often do you use the mobile phone?

                         i.   _Every      Day
                        ii.   _Every      Week
                       iii.   _Every      Month

                       iv.    ___When     needed (depending)

3.   Did you use a cell    phone one to three weeks after the earthquake?
                    1.      Yes

                   ii.      No
         b.   If yes, what did you use it for?
                                           or who   did you contact/why    etc.)
              (e.g.,to receive  messages,





                                       III. Medical Access &Needs


 1. Would    you say that in general     your health is excellent,    fair/average or    poor?
                    i.    Excellent

                   ii. ___Fair/Average
                   iii. __Poor


2. Do you have       a person you think of as     your personal doctor or     health care provider?
                    i.    Yes
                   ii. __No



                                                                                                             96
         b.    INTERVIEWER         PROBE IF "NO": Hlow do you get medical advice or care?





3.   Do you have a doctor      or other health   care provider   you see regularly    if you are ill or need
     a checkup?
                    i. ___Yes

                   ii. _No

         b.   INTERVIEWER         PROBE IF "YES":       What kind of doctor or healer do you see?





4.   Open-ended      Question:
     Are there limitations    for you to access healthcare     or to get responses    to your medical
     concerns   or questions    currently?  Please Explain.







5.   Open-ended      Question:

     What were your most pressing         medical   needs after the   earthquake struck     (within a week
     or three)?
                    i.  A month after?



                   ii. Six months after?



                   iii. Currently?



         b.   Which of these medical    needs were addressed?



          c.  Who   addressed these medical issues    for you:
                    i.      Local Haitian  clinic

                   ii. __International    Agency/NGO
                   iii._Friends/Family
                   iv. __Healer

                   v.  __Other     (explain)


6.   Open-ended      Question:
     Is there  any important    health or medical    information    that you feel like  you have difficulty
     getting  access   to?
                    1.    Yes

                   ii.    No
     a)If "YES"   what   type of information






                                                                                                            97
Pilot StudySummary


In summary,   the purpose of the usability pilot survey is to gain a deeper understanding of future

users' health needs, their use of and access to mobile phones, literacy level, and a deeper analysis

and understanding of the context and way in which      the MMER system could be employed by

future users. As underscored  in both Jennifer Chan and Nigel Snoad's interviews (2011), it is best
to obtain feedback from both humanitarian experts and future users, in order to shape the design

and development of the tool to their vision and needs.


We  have  now examined the feedback provided by experts,   integrated these into the system design

and survey design, and channeled  some of these ideas into potential avenues for exploration in the

future. Inaddition, a site selection analysis for the pilot study was carried out, and three regions

of interest were identified in Haiti. Finally, a four-tiered usabisurvey was created  and vetted.



Having completed the planning section of the     pilotstudy, we turn to  an overview of the final
steps to MMER's development and implementation.






































                                                                                                98
                                       8. CONCLUSION


 Summary


 The first section of the thesis (ChapteOne through Six) provided the context, relevance   of, and

 need for MMER within the    field of disaster recovery management.


 I provided the limitations, challenges and overarching context of MMER
                                                                               by examining the
coordination structure, urban complexities, technologies, and information  management present in

the disaster reliefefforts that unfolded following Haiti's devastatin7.0 magnitude earthquake of

January   2010. I then placed MMER within the context       of crisis communications, history of

theoretical trends, and current analyses of disaster 'vulnerability'(as exemplified  by the  PAR
model)  in the field of disaster management. I positioned
                                                         MMER at the recovery phase of disaster
relief within the disaster management cycle, and      further associated MMER's use with the

corresponding form of communication needed       (through the use of mobile phones) during the

recovery phase of disaster relief.


To provide the relevance of a
                              system like MMER, I identified the growing potential  for the use of
mobile phone-based applications   in disaster relief and recovery by affected populationsin low to

medium   income countries. By focusing on both the  fields of mobile health and the challenges and

needs faced in emergency medical logistics, a    technology assessment and identification of the

potential for a new form of medical   disaster relief technology was undertaken. I uncovered  the

challenges   of disaster relief logistics  and the medical supply chain, and        consequently
demonstrated the way in  which MMER's crisis mapping component could       respond directly to this

gap.



Need and potential demand for a telephony system    like MMER were addressed by mapping and

exposing the prevalence of mobile phone      penetration and the concurrent lack of access of
illiterate communities to disaster relietechnologies that are primarily built upon and dependent

on short message systems     (SMS); thus revealing a significant gap in existing   disaster relief

applications. Having established the existing gaps and need for a system like MMER, I turned to

its system design and user-centered functionalities.


The second  part of the thesis (commencing at Chapter Six) served as MMER's    'proof of concept'.

I presented MMER's system architecture, its ability to leverage     Interactive Voice Response


                                                                                               99
                            such as the outreach  strategies and campaigns   that would  be  applied
technology,  and elements
prior to MMER's    activation in-field,its user cycle, and architectural stacks. The  system  design

was  then vetted and modified  according  to feedback provided  by disasterrelief professionals who

were   subject matter  experts  in disaster relief technology,  community    engagement,    capacity

building, post-disaster communication   and media,  in-fieldemergency   medical  care response,  and

disaster reliefcrowd  sourced  technologies.  Finally,a site selection within Haiti was  carried out

using  geospatial  exclusion  (i.e.,illiteracy,redundancy   of  cellphone   coverage,   and  internet
                                 usability survey  was  then formulated   with the  guidance  of the
access). A  field test and  pilot
University  of  Central  Florida's  National  Science  Foundation   project  conducted   in 2011,  a

governmental   medical  access survey, and  feedback  provided by an  MIT  CoLab   field practitioner

based  out ofPort-au-Prince,  Haiti.



MMER     Requirements  & Selection

We   now  turn to the evidence  that shapes the particulars of how  the MMER     requirements   were
                                 indicates how   need  (as outlined  in  the summary    above)   was
configured.  The   table below
translated into general  parameters  for MMER,     and in turn what  and why    specific and current

technologies  were  selected.These  setsof needs  are answered  by front,middle-ware   and back-end

technologies  which  remain  to be tested at atechnological, infrastructuraland institutional/human

resources  level. General  parameters were  separated from the  selectionof specific technologies to

underscore   that MMER     ismodular   in nature; that the current technology   selected is ripe and

appropriate  for current needs (e.g.,data  access,bandwidth,   cellphone  towers  and mobile  phone
                the highest   penetration  in developing   countries). By separating    the  general
models   with
parameters   needed  with  the current technology  selected, the table below   further addresses the

evolving  pace  of technology  - thatthe technologies  selected willbe replaced  with time, and  that

ultimately the system  design is vendor neutral and technology  agnostic.



   PROBLEM    BEING       GENERAL    PARAMETER           MODULAR/          ISSUES/QUESTIONS       &
     ADDRESSED                                            CURRENT             RESEARCH     PATH
                                                       TECHNOLOGY
                                                          SELECTED


Access to medical        Voice-enabled program        >   FRONT   END      Technological testso
 disasterelief                                            TECHNOLOGY       determine qualityf voice
information and                                           --IVR program    recognitionsoftware and
 technologyforilliterate                                  with voice       linguisticapabilities.
 populations                                              recognition
                                                          software





                                                                                                  100
 Connect high impact          Telephony system (land line      >    MIDDLE-WARE         Potential limitation to
 global volunteers            and mobile phone)   that              TECHNOLOGY          scaling:volunteer
 directly with affected       connects medical
                                                                    - IVR system:       accessibilityvolume,  and
 communities.   Bypassing     practitioners directly with           Routing system      length of commitment.
 chaos of relief              affected communities/local            that enables        Introduces  a new channel
 coordination                 health workers.
                                                                    connection          for potentialnetwork
                                                                    between             overload.
                                                                    volunteers and

                                                                    callers.            >    Examine different
                                                                                             business structures and
                                                                                             models for most
                                                                                             effective
                                                                                                      scaling of
                                                                                             MMER.

                                                                                        >    Examine if MMER

                                                                                            could provide   and sell
                                                                                            backend   technology  to

                                                                                            agencies  and have
                                                                                            agencies  take charge of
                                                                                            staffing their in-
                                                                                            country  MMER

                                                                                            system  (for operations,
                                                                                            medical  volunteers,

                                                                                            etc.)

                                                                                        >   Identify and form   key
                                                                                            partnerships
                                                                                                          to
                                                                                            institutionalizeMMER
                                                                                            within an established
                                                                                            organization.
                            I                               +                        4.-

Large call volumes, call     Routing system that               >   MIDDLE-WARE         Technological   assessment
centers with human           decreases cost of call (i.e.,         TECHNOLOGY          to testresiliency
response  on front-end       eliminating need to pay                                                     and
                                                                   -- IVR  'Tropo'     robustness  of systems
unable to handle             individual at front-end) and          system  for         independently   and in
                             is resilient/robustin times of        routing             combination.
                             high demand and need
                                                                   -  IVR server
                                                                   and
                                                                   infrastructure

                                                                   BACK-END
                                                                   TECHNOLOGY
                                                                   -- IBM Watson

                                                                   for medical
                                                                   triage,
                                                                   efficiency



                                                                                    I














                                                                                                                101
Vulnerability of Medical    High  provenance   and           >    MIDDLE-WARE        Specific software to
Logistics post-disaster.    pedigree  crisisaps  that             TECHNOLOGY         generate maps  from
Essential to have an         displayreported  needs,              -- XML/PHP         database collected during
                             ailments and 'hot spots'.            backend            MMER    calls to be further
accurate user-generated
medical  supply chain        Infovitalto pharmaceutical           database server    investigated/determined
analysis.Gap  identified     companies,  governments,             (tocapture info    (e.g.,esri,pen   Street
in need  aslatterisnot       reliefgencies, etc.                  generated by       Maps,  Google  Knowledge
          in place.                                               callers)           Graph,  etc.)
currently




                                            medical          >    MIDDLE-            Form   partnership and
 Systematized and            Voice-enabled
 standardized health care    search by topic/ailment  with        WARE/              discuss with United
 publicservice               Pre-recorded  public service         ANCILLARY          Nations  Cluster system  and
 announcements               announcement   by topic              TECHNOLOGY         United  Nations  Office for
                                                                  -- IVR system -    Coordinated   Humanitarian
 (standardized across                                                                                       and
 agencies,orgs, gov,                                              Tropo  - has       Affairs for integration
 clinics)                                                         messages  pre-     access to cluster-based
                                                                  recorded within    public service messages
                                                                  system.            (and/or  script/text).

                                                                  Searchable
                                                                  through  voice
                                                                  recognition
                                                                  software



 Having   completed    the empirical   analysis,  proof  of concept,   design  of MMER,      and  an analysis   of

 the technologies    and   general   parameters   needed    within  MMER,      we  now    look  ahead   to  future

 research,  and  a brief summary     of apathway    to MMER's      implementation.






 Implementation     &  Proposed   Future   Research

                                                                                      research'  phase   in which
 As  illustrated in Figure   29, the thesis  has reached   the end  of the  'current

 the pilot  plan, survey   design,  and  appropriate   site selection  analysis  has  been   completed;    yet the

 usability  pilot,technological    robustness   test,and  scaling  stage has  yet to be  accomplished.




















                                                                                                               102
      \11.    'it      m   Ri >t\KI   , I \l\.   I  ON




        C (trI XI I tR NI-VN4IRk      N1 I [-Di ~I   %~I/ I rIi~~) i (         L.,Nb*ttIIN UumI I &S(N  I




                                              ujhIb \ ,':I



                           I haitn                                P14  IPlan     I 01 ina td     Testlt.cholplcal
      \Intrkh4 1)R&     \Wdicaland           MMEI 1                 Surey        L,abithtvud%,   Robustne
                       I ogltca WV-          SystemDeign                         L crFvvdbaklk   Sstemn & Cod tr


                                             Wtmingof                 {mg.Mc
                                                                                          RussnabPlane
                                             hId Fxpt1)1                          amek  M        barMbwrM
                                                                                F.arnnw NIMER' vliIAmlreach
                                                                                                               }







                                                                Current  Research                    \Cxt  Steps


Figure 29: MMER Next     Steps&Timeline



Immediate next steps in MMER's development                (see Figure 29) would be the completion and


analysis  of the results of the usability survey study, followed by a technological robustness test

(see Appendix One for sample survey that would accompany                 the  technology    test) to ensure  the

ability of MMER's IVR structure to respond to and route significant call volumes               (in the range  of

hundreds or thousands of simultaneous calls). Moreover,                 I would secure partnerships with

medical   agencies,   renowned hospitals, and the chief architect       or Director   of the United Nation's

Cluster system's 'library of messages'       (and would wish to invite these individuals onto MMER's

Board   of Advisors) to oversee elements such
                                                      as MMER's medical scripts, automated           questions,

user experience, and medical volunteer recruitment. I would further research and investigate

means to recruit, assemble, and train high impact medical volunteers through major hospitals or

medical schools.



In an attempt   to attain scale within low income,      high risk, low-infrastructure areas     (that are either

low-density rural regions or high-density urbanized zones) I have created a sustainable                business





                                                                                                             103
plan with the generous   financial support of the MIT Legatum Fellowship.      MMER's business

plan addresses  basics such as the cost and type of products sold through  MMER's     services, the

MMER's management structure      and team, a market analysis, and MMER's start-up    financial data
(for its first five years operation).



A humanitarian  disaster relief tool, MMER is low (to no) cost for its immediate users. Catered to
illiterate, disaster-affected communities,  MMER     would make it possible to unite affected

communities and their self-reported needs  directly to global volunteers and medical expertise,and

to provide isolated communities in  developing countries access to healthcare information  through

land-line or mobile phones. Moreover, MMER could generate        crisis maps and medical supply

assessments to enhance disaster relief logistics, andolds the potential to be scaled up at low-cost
and respond to heavy  call loads during disasterrecovery due to its IVR infrastructure and system

design. MMER joins the nascent drive     and effort to create locally adapted, low-cost, and need-

specific disaster relief technology  that simultaneously serves humanitarian agencies,    national

governments,  and most importantly, the victims  of natural disaster.






































                                                                                               104
    APPENDIX       1 - SAMPLE SURVEY          FOR TECHNOLOGICAL              TESTING PHASE


Objective:   MMER/     Mobile Phone     Application Feedback

Script to Explain MMER


The  mobile phone   idea is tohave a call servicecenter that you would use  to call in foryour medical
problems or   questions (e.g.,uestions about  pregnancy, disease, infections,or how  to treat a wound).

The way   it would  work would   be voice-based  (instead of text messaging)  so that you  could speak
your  responses,  instead of write or texting  them. After  you  dialthe number,   a computer   service
would  respond  and would   ask you a few questions about your  age and  locationand would   ask you to
describe your  medical symptoms.    You  would be  then transfered  to a medical specialistwho   speaks

Creole  or French, and who could   respond to your questions  over the phone.

[User tries out MMER application    independently. Approximate   Trial time:10-15minutes]


In this survey we are looking for ideas and feedback  on this phone  system from  potentialfuture users
like you, so please be open with your responses.


1. Do    you like   the fact that  it is voice-enabled   as opposed    to a text-based?
                   i.    Yes

                   ii.___No
                  iii.__ Either option  (text oroice) is fine forme.


2. Were     you  comfortable    answering    automated     questions   posed by    a phone   system
     (i.e., not a person)?
                 i.   _  Yes, I am comfortable  speaking  to a phone system.

                ii.  __  No, I do not want  to talkto a phone  system.


     a)  If 'NO'  Why would     you  not be comfortable   with  this?





3.   Are you   comfortable    describing   your   health symptoms      over  the phone    to a phone

     system (i.e.,  not a  person)   to collect information?
               iii.  __  Yes, I am fine describing health symptoms   to a machine.
               iv.    _  No, I am  not comfortable  with this


     b)  If 'NO'  Why   would   you not  be comfortable   with this?







4.   Have   you  ever called   a telephone   system that    automatically    answers   your   call and

     transfers  you to   a person  (e.g., at a bank,  clinic,  company)?
                 1.      Yes



                                                                                                    105
               1.      No





5. Could you    imagine   using this system to ask questions     about your medical    needs
    or queries?
               i.  __  Yes

              ii.  ___ No


General  Feedback


6.  What do you like about this phone service idea?









7. What do you not like about this phone service idea?








8. Do you have any suggestions       or ideas on how to improve the application?































                                                                                            106
APPENDIX      2 - SUBJECT MATTER EXPERTS             EVALUATING MASTERS THESIS



             Field

IVR Systems

                                        SUBJECT MATTER                    FACULTY/STAFF
                                   Mobile Technology & mHealth
                                                                   Dr. David Metcalf (UCF)
                                                                   Director, Mixed Emerging
                                                                   Technology  Innovations.


                                                                   Dr. Steve Chan (MIT/Harvard)
                                                                   Mentor and Design Guidance

                                                                   Luke Read (UCF)

                                                                   Tropo Specialist,
                                                                   Development/Coding Guidance

                                                                   Dr. Leo Anthony Celi

                                                                   Medical Informatics
                                                                   Harvard-MIT Health Sciences
                                                                   and Technology and
                                                                   Massachusetts General Hospital


Humanitarian Disaster Relief-
based Field Work & Expertise

                                        SUBJECT MATTER                    FACULTY/STAFF


                                  Disaster Relief Technology       Jennifer Chan (see below)


                                                                   Dr. Nigel Snoad
                                                                   Director, Google Disaster Relief
                                                                   Technology Unit


                                  DisasterRelief Leadership        Dr. Enzo Bollentino
                                  (Academia)                       Director, Harvard Humanitarian
                                                                   Initiative


                                 Anthropological/ Field-Based      Meredith McLaughlin
                                  Methodology & Research           Qualitative & User Experience

                                                                   Specialist,Formerly with
                                                                   Harvard-MIT   Health Sciences
                                                                   & Technology


                                                                   Community   Innovators Lab,
                                                                   MIT (CoLab)

                                                                   Dr. Tracy St. Benoit (UCF)




                                                                                          107
                                  Disaster Relief                  Jacobo Quintanillo,
                                  Communications & Media           Humanitarian Director of

                                                                   Internews

                                  Disaster Recovery                Jamilah Mahmood
                                  Community-based   initiatives &  Former Chief of the

                                  Capacity Building                Humanitarian Response Branch
                                                                   of the United Nations
                                                                   Population  Fund (UNFPA),


                                  Emergency  Medical               Jennifer Chan
                                  Practitioner& Crowd Sourced      Emergency/post-disaster
                                  DisasterRelief Technology        medical  practitioner & crowd
                                                                   sourced disaster relief
                                                                   technology evaluation

Social Entrepreneurship/
Business Planning

                                        SUBJECT MATTER                     FACULTY/STAFF


                                                                   Dr. Steve Chan
                                                                   Will Guyster;

                                                                   Legatum   Center for
                                                                   Development   &
                                                                   Entrepreneurship. MIT.


































                                                                                           108


         Washington,   DC: National Governors' Association (for Diagram of Disaster Management
         Cycle)


New Technologies,    2009. Coyle, Diane and Patrick Meier. New Technologiesin Emergencies& Conflicts:
         The Role of Informationand SocialNetworks. Washington, D.C. and London. UK:     UN

         Foundation-Vodafone     Foundation Partnership,  2009

Renn,  et al., 1992. Renn, 0., Burns, W., Kasperson, J., Kasperson, R., Slovic, P., The Social

         Amplification of Risk: TheoreticalFoundationsanEmpiricalApplications. Journal of Social Issue s,
         Vol 48. No.4, 1992. pp. 137-160

Social Amplification,  2003. Eds Pidgeon, N., Kasperson, R., Slovic, P. The Socia/Amp4fication of Risk.

         Cambridge University Press, 2003

Stallings, R. 1995. Pomoting Risk: ConstructitheEarthquake Threat.Ilawthorne, New York: Aldine de

         Gruyter.

Tierney, 2011. Facingthe Une.\pected.DisasterPreparednessand Responsein the UnitedStates. Tierney,
         K., Lindell, M., and Perry, R.Joseph Henry Press, Washington,    D.C.


Wisner, B.    2001.    "Capitalism and the Shifting Spatial and Social Distribution      of Hazard   and
         Vulnerability." AustraliaJournalofEmergeng  Management16:44-50.


Wisner, B., Piers, B. Terry, C. and Ian D., 2004. At Risk: Natural HaZards, People'sVulnerability and
         Disasters.Routledge


White, G., 1994 "Natural Hazards Research" in EnvironmentalRisks and Hazards. Cutter, S (Ed).
         Rutgers University: Prentice Hall.




                           CHAPTER   2: MOBILE PHONES    & DISASTER RELIEF


Coyle, D., 2005. The RoleofMobiles in Disastersand Emergencies.Version 1, 24 December, 2005. GSM
         Association.

Fogg,  B.J., Eckles, D., 2010. Mobile Persuasion:20 Perspectives
                                                               of the Future of Behavior Change.Stanford,
California: Stanford University.

ISCRA M Conference,     2010. New Technologiesin Emergencies& Conflict.

         (International Community on Information     Systems for Crisis Response and Management)

ITU, 2009. Measuring the Information     Society- The ICT  Development    Index, March

         2009

 \Iarincioni, F. 2007. "Information technologies and the sharing of disaster knowledge: the critical
         role of professional culture". Disasters,Volume 31, Number   4.


Mileti,D. S. & Sorensen, J. HI.(1990). Communication     of emergency  public warnings. Washing- ton,
         DC: Federal Emergency Management       Administration.


Rodriquez, R., Diaz, W., Santos,  J.,Aguirre, B., 2007. "Communicating    Risk & Uncertainty: Science,



                                                                                                     III

                                        CHAPTER   4: MHEALTH
MHEALTH    POLICY SECTION

Donner,  J. 2008. ResearchApproaches toMobile PhoneUse in the DevelopingWorld:A Reviewof
         theLiterature. InformationSociety, Volume 24 Issue 3, May 2008.

Geser, H1.Towards a Sociological Theory of the Mobile Phone. 2004

         (http:socio.ch/mobil      index_ mobile.htm)

Hammond, A. Digitaly Empowered     Development.Foreign Affairs, 2001, #80.


Khron, R., Metcalf, D. (Eds). 2012. mHealth From Smartphonesto Smart Sstems. Flealthcare Information
         and Management Systems Society (IIIMSS). Chicago.


Kaplan, W. Can theubiquitouspowerofmobikphones beusedto improvehealth oitcomesin developingcountries?
         Globalization and Flealth. BioMed Central, 2006. Center for International   lealth and
         Development,   Boston  University School of Public  Flealth.


Kundu, A., Sarangi, N. ICT andHuman Development:TowardsBuildinga CompositeIndexfor Asia. Realizing
         the MillieniumuDevelopmentGoals. United Nations Development    Program (UNDP) Technical

         Paper. 2004 (http://www.apdip.net/elibrary#rhdr)

Feldmann, V. Mobile overtakes Internet: implications   for Policy and Regulation. International
         Telecommunications    Union 2003.


Forestier, E., Grace J.,Kenny C., Can informationand communicationspolicybepro-poor?
         Telecommunications    Policy. 2002.


Fortney et al.,. A re-conceptualizationof access for 21st century healthcare.J Gen Intern Med. 2011
         Nov ;26 Suppl 2:639-47.


Vodafone   Policy Paper, 2005. Africa: The Impact of Mobile Phones. Vodafone Policy Paper Series
         Number 2, 2005.


                               CHAPTER   4:OTHER MHEALTH       SECTIONS

ALERTNET,      2012. Rodriguez,  Thomas Dunmore. ReconstructionandHIVin       Haiti. 11Jan 2012 17:15
         International HIV/AIDS     Alliance, UK.

         (http://www.trust.org/alertnet/news/reconstruction-and-hiv-in-haiti/)

Chetley, A., (ed.), 2006. Improvinghealth,connectpeople:the roleof ICTs in thehealthsectorof

         developingcountries.A FrameworkPaper.Volume: 1254, Issue: 1254, Publisher: infoDev,
         Pages: 1-65

CNN H-ealth, 2010, Park, Madison. Haiti Earthquake couldtrigge  prossible edicalperec ttorm'January

         13, 2010. CNN
         (http://articles.cnn.com  2010-01-13/health/haiti.earthquake.medical.risks   1 haiti
         earthquake-infections-injuriess=P-Nt:I:       T)


Dalberg, 2010. Hlausman, Miller, Smith, Altman,   Mechael, Block. Study on MobileApplicationsfor the
         Health Sector.Literature Review. 12July 2010. Dalberg Global Development     Advisors for the

         World  Bank.




                                                                                                    113
Earth Institute, 2010. Bamersand GapsAffecting mHealth in Low andMiddle IncomeCountries:A
         Poicy White Paper.Washington,   D.C.: mHealth Alliance.


Human Development       Index, UNDP, 2011. Accessed -March2012
       (http:  hdrstats.undp.org/en/countries     profilcs    II'll.html)


Ivatury et al,A Doctorin Your Pocket:Health Hot/inesin DevelopingCountries.GSMA, 2009.

Marmot, 2007. Achieving healthequity:from rootcausestofair ontcomes.Abridged version of the Interim

         Statement  of the Commission     on Social Determinants    of Ilealth. Vol 370. September    29,
         2007. The Lancet.


mHealth,  WHO,    2011. mHealth -New horizonsfor healththroughmobiletechnologiesG . lobal
         Observatory   for elealth Series. Vol 3. World Health Organization, 2011. Switzerland.


PA 10, 1998. Pan American Health Organization, Report on Ilaiti.
       (http://www.paho.org/    english/sha/prflhai.htm)


Patnaik, Brunskill, and Thies. 2009. "Evaluating the accuracy of data collection on mobile phones:    A
         study of forms, SMS, and voice." Informationand CommunicationTechnologiesand Development
         (ICTD)  International Conference.  2009. 74-84


Stepanian, R., Lacal, J.2003, "Emerging mobile communication technologies       for health: Some
         imperative  notes on m health." In: IEEE (Ed.), The 251hSilver59 Anniversary International

         Conferenceof theIEEE Engineeringin MedicineandBiologySociety.Cancun, Mexico: IEEE. 2003.

The Economist, September 24, 2009. Special Report: Telecoms       in emerging Markets.   'Mobile

         Marvels" Special Report, Print Edition. (http://www.economist.com/node/14483896)

UN AIDS, 2010 'UNAIDS Report on the Global AIDS Epidemic'

         (http/:/wwv.unaids   .org/globalreport/Global_report.htm)

UNICEF Statistics, 2010. Accessed March, 2012.

         (htrp: /www.unicef. org/ infobycountry /haiti   statistics.html)

UN OCFIA, Report 2010, Haiti. United Nations Office for the Coordination        of Humanitarian

         Affairs. Accessed March 2012. (http://ochaonline.un.org/ocha20l      0/haiti.html)

WHO, 2003. Priiss-Ostiin, , Mathers, Corvaldn,    and Woodward.     "The Global  Burden of Disease

         concept",  Chapter 3. Introductionandme/hods:Assessing the environmentalburdenofdiseaseat
         national and local levels. Environmental   burden   of disease. Series   No.1.   World   Health
         Organization



             CHAPTER 5: SUMMARIZING      REMARKS - ESTABLISHING     THE NEED    FOR MMER


GAR, Global Assessment Report on Disaster Risk Reduction. United Nations International          Strategy
for Disaster Reduction Secretariat (UNISDR).
         2009 (http: /wvww. reventionweb.net english/hvogo        gar/ report/index.php?id=9413)

         2011  RevealingRisk, Redefining Development
         (bttp-/wwvpreventionweb.net        cngjish/hyogo/  gar 2011 /en home/index.html)




                                                                                                      114
IISI, 2003, Institut  laitien de Statistique et d'Informatique2003
                  (http://www.ihsi.ht/rgph-resultatensembleeducation.htm)


IPCC   (2007) Climate Change2007 Theplysical sciencebasis.Contributionofworking
        group I to theourthassessmentreportftheIntergovernmentalanel on
         ClimateChange.(Solomon, S.,  Quin, D., M\tanning,NI., Chen Z., Mfarquis, NI.,
         Averyt, K.B., et al. (Eds.)). Cambridge, UK and New York, New York:

         Cambridge University Press.

M\fallik,NI.,2003. Mobile and WirelessDesignEssentials. Wiley Publishing Inc.


ml lealth, WFIO, 2011. mHealth -New horizonsfor health throughmobiletechnologies. lobal
         Observatory  for e~lealth Series. Vol 3. World Health Organization, 2011. Switzerland.


New Technologies,   2009. Coyle, Diane and Patrick M\eier.New Technologiesin Emergencies &  Conflicts:
         The Role ofInformation and SocialNetworks. Washington,D.C. and London. UK: UN

         Foundation-Vodafone    Foundation Partnership, 2009



Patnaik, Brunskill,and Thies. 2009. "Evaluating the accuracy of data collection on mobile phones:   A
         study of forms, SMAIS a,d voice." Information and CommunicationTechnologiesandDevelopment
         (ICTD) International  Conference. 2009. 74-84


Picariello, K. (1997). Case #54: Deforestationin Haiti. ICE Case Studies.ICE. Port-au-
         Prince. ICE


Tearfund. 2008. Disaster Risk Reduction and the Post-2012 Framework. Bonn Climate
         Change Talks 2-13 June 2008. Available at <http://www.preventionweb.net/files/
         8936_DRR20post201229thhfayl.pdf>.


Tearfund.  2009. Linking Climate ChangeAdaptation and Disaster Risk Reduction.Teddington,
         UK: Tearfund.


UNDP    (2001) DisasterProfilesof theLeast DevelopedCountries. Third UnitedNations
         Conferenceon Least DevelopedCountries.Brussels, United Nations


UNDP (2005). Republique d'Haiti: RapportNational surla Preventiondes
         CatastrophesUN World Conference on Disaster     Reduction.  Kobe-lyogo.   Japan,

         UNDP.

World Bank (2010) Pro-PoorAdaptation toClimate Changein Urban Centers:Case
         Studies of Vulnerability andResiliencein Kenyaand Nicaragua. Mfoser,C., Norton, A. Stein, A.

         Georgieva, S. Report No. 54947-GLB. World Bank. Washington DC. June 2010.

World Bank. (2009) MIehrotra, S. et al., Frameworkfor Cit ClimateRisk Assessment.

         World Bank Commissioned     Research. Miarseille,France.

                                     CHAPTER   6:SYSTEM DESIGN


CDAC, 2011. Nelson, A., Sigal, I., Zambrano, D. Media, Information & Communities:Lessonsfrom Haiti.
         CDAC Haiti, Internews &    Knight Foundation.   2011



                                                                                                   115
IBM Software,     Solutions  for  H-ealthcarc, 2012

          (http   www-0 11I.ibm.com/software/success    /cssdb.nsf  CS/CP   \R-
          8R5RXWPOpenDocument&Site=default&ctv=en-us)


Norheim-lagtun,       2010. Norheim-H-agtun,      I., Meir, P. Crowdsourcingfor Crisis Mapping in Haiti.
          Innovations: Technology,      Governance,     Globalization.  Fall 2010, Vol. 5, No. 4, Pages 81-89:

          81-89.


Waxer,   VoIP   News. The Essential Guide       to SIP Trunking.    Accessed   March,   2012.
          http: /www.voip     -news.con/feature      esscntial-guide-sip-trunking-040108/






























































                                                                                                                116