CommunicationsoftheAssociationforInformationSystems


Volume32                                                                               Article5


5-1-2013


OnlineSocialNetworks,SocialCapitalandHealth-

relatedBehaviors:AState-of-the-artAnalysis

CarolinDurst
InstituteofInformationSystems,UniversityErlangen-Nuremberg,Germany,carolin.durst@wiso.uni-erlangen.de

JanineViol
InstituteofInformationSystems,UniversityErlangen-Nuremberg,Germany

NilminiWickramasinghe
EpworthHealthcare&SchoolofBusinessandIT,RMITUniversity,Australia

 












Followthisandadditionalworksat:http://aisel.aisnet.org/cais

RecommendedCitation

Behaviors:AState-of-the-artAnalysis,"CommunicationsoftheAssociationforInformationSystems:Vol.32,Article5.ated
Availableat:http://aisel.aisnet.org/cais/vol32/iss1/5


ThismaterialisbroughttoyoubytheJournalsatAISElectronicLibrary(AISeL).IthasbeenacceptedforinclusioninCommunicationsofthe
AssociationforInformationSystemsbyanauthorizedadministratorofAISElectronicLibrary(AISeL).Formoreinformation,pleasecontact
elibrary@aisnet.org.
Online Social Networks, Social Capital and Health-related Behaviors: A State-

of-the-art Analysis




Carolin Durst
Institute of Information Systems, University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Germany

carolin.durst@wiso.uni-erlangen.de



Janine Viol
Institute of Information Systems, University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Germany


Nilmini Wickramasinghe

Epworth Healthcare & School of Business and IT, RMIT University, Australia
















 The percentage of obese individuals in the population has increased exponentially over the last decade, making
 obesity a phenomenon of significant global concern. Individual behaviors, preferences and lifestyle choices are
 subject to social and environmental influences and social networks have been identified as a key contributor to the
 global obesity epidemic.  Numerous empirical studies have found a relationship between dimensions of social
 capital, well-being and population health. It is the thesis of this article that social capital in online social networks
 might be similarly associated. Addressing previously identified gaps in the literature, our conceptual model enables
 the analysis of the relationships between the structure and content of an individual’s online social network, the
 resulting opportunities and limitations to accessing resources and his or her health-related behaviors and body
 weight is introduced. Moreover, the model incorporates potential social capital as a special type of social capital in
 online social networks and uses network-based measures instead of self-reported data. Additionally, literature-
 based hypotheses discussing the relationships between the constructs of the model are presented. Establishing
 profound theoretical groundwork, this article encourages future research crossing the boundaries between
 information systems, health informatics and sociology. This study concludes by proposing a new Facebook e-health

 application to collect longitudinal data using the aforementioned conceptual model in order to explore the presented
 ideas further.

 Keywords: conceptual model, social capital, online social networks, social determinants of health, social network
 analysis

 Editor’s Note: The article was handled by the Department Editor for Information Systems and Healthcare.

                                                                  Volume 32, Article 5, pp. 134-158, May 2013

 The manuscript was received 09/07/2012 and was with the authors 1 months for 1 revision.


               Volume 32                                                                 Article 5
                      Online Social Networks, Social Capital and Health-related Behaviors: A State-of-
                      the-art Analysis






             I. INTRODUCTION
             “People are connected, so their health is connected.” This statement, by Smith and Christakis [2008], serves to
             summarize in one sentence a central theme in this article.


             Overweight and obesity have become an issue of global concern. In 1995, 200 million adults worldwide were obese
             and another eighteen million under-five children were classified as overweight [WHO, 2012b]. By 2008, the number
             of overweight adults reached 1.5 billion, with 200 million men and nearly 300 million women of these being obese.

             This rapidly increasing prevalence of obesity is a phenomenon often referred to as the “obesity epidemic” [WHO,
             2000]. Christakis and Fowler [2007] who conducted a thirty-two-year longitudinal study suggest a person-to-person
             spread of obesity similar to the transmission of an infectious disease. Supporting their study, Gershenson [2011]
             notes that the spread of ideas and behaviors, as well as contagious trends and habits within social networks, may
             provide a powerful substitute for physical mechanisms to spread diseases and result in a so-called “social infection.”

             Yet social networks themselves are value-neutral and, hence, may just as well offer a means to stop the propagation
             of non-communicable diseases in the same ways that they facilitate their spread [Gershenson, 2011]. For instance,
             weight management interventions, including network-driven strategies, may be an effective means to reinforce
             weight-loss progress [Bahr, Browning, Wyatt and Hill, 2009].


             McNeill, Kreuter and Subramanian [2006] identified social networks as one of the most important dimensions of
             people’s social environment that may enable or constrain the adoption of health-promoting behaviors. Additionally,
             living and working conditions, as well as broader social, economic and cultural circumstances, serve to shape the
             social network in which an individual is embedded [Dahlgren and Whitehead, 2007].


             Social media have become part of many people’s everyday life and are suggested to influence the diffusion and
             adoption of health-related behaviors [BVDW, 2010; Ma, Chen and Xiao, 2010].


             Taking into account the growing importance of online social networks, this article investigates the role of online
             social networks in the context of overweight and obesity and proposes starting points for the usage of online social
             networks to foster healthier lifestyles in the future.


             II. BACKGROUND
             Worldwide obesity has more than doubled since the 1980s. Formerly considered a high-income-country problem,

             today, obesity is increasingly linked to urban settings in low and middle-income countries [WHO, 2011a]. Moreover,
             obesity leads to serious health consequences [Pi-Sunyer, 2002] and is associated with more deaths worldwide than
             deaths in underweight populations [WHO, 2011b]. The future looks even more bleak, given that approximately 43
             million children under the age of five in 2010 have been diagnosed as medically overweight, which indicates that the

             projections are likely to be even higher for obese adults within the next years [WHO, 2011a]. According to the WHO
             [2012a], obesity is particularly problematic in North America, Egypt and Saudi Arabia.

             In and of themselves, these numbers of obese populations are alarming indeed, but, when considered in conjunction
             with the fact that obesity also is a direct risk factor for a much greater likelihood of various complex and unpleasant

             secondary disorders such as diabetes, heart diseases and cancer [MedStar Physician Partners/MedStar Family,
             2007], it is evident that the far-reaching impact of obesity is not only on individual health outcomes but also on the
             economic impact to healthcare delivery for countries. Yach, Stuckler and Brownell [2006] distinguish between the
             macroeconomic and microeconomic burden of obesity and associated secondary disorders: The first refers to the

             direct costs in the form of medical and treatment costs leading to increased healthcare expenses: For example, in
             the U.S., the medical costs of obesity were estimated in 2008 to be as high as $147 billion per year. This number is
             equal to about 9 percent of all medical spending [Finkelstein, Trogdon, Cohen and Dietz, 2009]. By 2030, costs
             attributable to overweight and obesity are projected to account for 16–18 percent of total U.S. healthcare costs
             [Wang, Beydoun, Liang, Caballero and Kumanyika, 2008]. On the other hand, the microeconomic burden accrues in

             the form Online Social Networks, Social Capital and Health-related Behaviors: A State-education, lower earnings and
             incomes, a higher rate of premature retirement and unemployment and, therefore, higher dependence on public
             welfare [Yach et al., 2006].





             Volume 32                         Article 5
136
The causes of overweight and obese populations are multifaceted and result from the co-occurrence and interaction

of several factors, including individual medical conditions and behaviors, social determinants and socioeconomic
factors [James, Leach, Kalamara and Shayeghi, 2001]. While it is true that individual medical conditions, such as
genetics, may determine a person’s susceptibility to gain weight, the dramatic increase in the number of obese

people worldwide cannot be explained by medical conditions alone [WHO, 2000]. Other factors, such as individual
behaviors that include dietary and physical activity patterns, determine the energy imbalance of individuals, which in
turn can lead to obesity [WHO, 2011a]. The World Health Organization [WHO, 2011a] identifies an energy
imbalance between consumed and expended calories as the fundamental cause of obesity. Generally, over the past

decades an increased consumption of energy-dense foods that are high in fat, sugar and salt can be observed.
Contemporaneously, however, people engage less and less in physical activity, especially as many forms of work
and relaxation activities are now more sedentary [Yach et al., 2006]. Thus, it appears that individual behaviors and

lifestyle choices shaped by the social environment drive and significantly impact the global obesity epidemic [WHO,
2011a; Huffman, 2011]. Individual behaviors, in particular, health-related behaviors, such as physical activity, diet,
sleep, smoking, alcohol consumption, as well as adherence to medical treatments and help-seeking behavior
[Berkman, Glass, Brissette and Seeman, 2000; Hyyppä, 2010], appear to be significant in this context. Hence,

investigating the relationship between online social networks and an individual’s body weight and health-related
behaviors―including dietary and physical activity patterns―thus forms the focus in this research.


Previous studies have focused on the spread of obesity within traditional (offline) social networks (e.g., Christakis
and Fowler, 2007; Cohen-Cole and Fletcher, 2008; Fowler and Christakis, 2008). However, the dramatic growth of
electronic (online) social networks has resulted in blurring the boundaries between the real and the virtual world
[BVDW, 2010].


Web 2.0 technologies are applied in various areas, such as education [Shim, Decleva and Guo, 2011], traveling,
organizational knowledge management [McKeen and Smith, 2007] and job seeking [Parameswaran and Whinston,

2007; BVDW, 2010]. In the context of health care, such Web 2.0 or Health 2.0 applications combine health data and
health information with (patient) experience through the use of information and communication technologies (ICT)
[Bos, Marsh, Carroll, Gupta and Rees, 2008]. One example of a Health 2.0 application is the largest and best-known
online social networking health site, PatientsLikeMe. Founded in 2004, the health online social network had more

than 160,500 members as of August 2012 [PatientsLikeMe, 2012]. PatientsLikeMe (PLM) allows its members to find
patients with similar symptoms, to share health data and to learn from others. Following a patient-driven healthcare
approach, PLM facilitates disease self-management through better information and expertise sharing [Swan, 2009].

In academia, the data generated on the platform is used in many ways, including data mining for biomedical
research [Nakamura, Bromberg, Bhargava, Wicks and Zeng-Treitler, 2012] and crowdsourced health research
studies [Swan, 2012], for instance. Embracing patient-centered health-informatics and aspects of persuasive
technologies, Health 2.0 applications are becoming recognized as an effective self-care information and disease

self-management tool today [Mattila, Korhonen, Salminen, Ahtinen, Koskinen, Särelä, Pärkkä and Lappalainen,
2010]. There is clearly scope for persuasive technologies to encourage individuals to live healthy lifestyles with a
focus on being physically active using mobile phone applications [Munson and Consolvo, 2012].


To date, social media have proved to be powerful in shaping opinions and behaviors and affecting different areas of
public life [Wefing, 2012]. Recent examples include the 2009 “Twitter-revolution” in Iran, as well as the revolutions in
Tunisia and Egypt at the beginning of 2011 in which social media was important in organizing the protest movement

[von Rohr, 2011]. During the riots in England in August 2011, rioters communicated using social media applications
to incite looting and violence [Schone, 2011]. On the other hand, Twitter and Facebook were used to spread
information on the riots and to organize clean-up operations in the affected areas [Polke-Majewski, 2011].


Many people are connected to their friends via online social networks. Those online friends may―just as with “real
world contacts”―shape people’s opinions [Kaplan and Haenlein, 2010]; particularly, influential members are capable
of maximizing the spread of information within social network sites [Bodendorf and Kaiser, 2009; Kaiser, Kröckel and

Bodendorf, 2010].

Therefore, an influence on people’s health-related behaviors through online contacts is suggested [Ma et al., 2010].

In a recent study of a health online social network, Ma et al. [2010] showed that the users’ diet progress toward
weight-change goals was positively correlated with the number of friends and their friends’ weight-change
performance. The authors state that online social connections may have a great influence on users’ health-related
behaviors and that the strength of social influence may even be greater than in real-world social networks.


Given that online social networks today are becoming more important in people’s daily lives, it is reasonable to
hypothesize that online social networks might also impact the adoption of health-related behaviors. Thus, this

research focuses on the analysis of the relationship between people’s online social connections, their health-related


                                                                         Volume 32                         Article 5
                                                                                                                               137
             behaviors and their body weight in order to create network-driven strategies to promote and reinforce positive norms

             and sound health-related behaviors.

             III. LITERATURE REVIEW

             This article aims to build a conceptual model to facilitate the use of online social networks to positively affect an
             individual’s health status. Dealing with a specific and interdisciplinary topic [Wilson and Lankton, 2004] which―to the

             authors’ best knowledge―has not been addressed in the existing literature, the conceptual model is constructed
             using concepts from several academic disciplines, including sociology, information systems, network research and
             social network analysis [Steiny, 2009].


             Providing the theoretical background for this research, the following sections examine contributions dealing with the
             association between offline or online social networks, social capital and health (see Figure 1), as well as existing
             frameworks on social capital.














                        Figure 1. Association Between Offline or Online Social Networks, Social Capital and Health


             Social Networks

             A social network “consists of a finite set or sets of actors and the relation or relations defined on them” [Wasserman
             and Faust, 1994, p. 20]. Most commonly, social relationships are categorized according to strong and weak ties
             [Kneidinger, 2010]. Tie strength is determined by the amount of time, the emotional intensity, the intimacy and the

             reciprocal services that characterize the tie [Granovetter, 1973]. Hereby, intimacy is influenced by the degree of
             mutual confiding between individuals, the amount of emotional investment in the relationship and the importance of
             discussed matters [Granovetter, 1973; PRI, 2005].


             According to Granovetter [1973] strong ties are intimate bonds between family members or close friends that are
             maintained regularly and permanently. Tending to be concentrated in particular groups, they are of an informal
             nature and occur between network members who have a shared social identity. In contrast, weak ties emerge as

             non-intimate bonds between acquaintances. Maintained infrequently and inconsistently, weak ties may be formal
             contacts and are more likely to link members of different small groups [Rostila, 2011].

             With regard to online media, Bakshy, Rosenn, Marlow and Adamic [2012] found that weak ties play a more dominant

             role than strong ties in information diffusion. Haythornthwaite [2002] suggests latent ties as an additional type of tie
             which emerges when a new medium (for example, social network sites) is introduced. Those ties are technically
             possible communication channels that have not yet been activated and may help to develop and strengthen weak
             ties. Moreover, situational ties occur when individuals share common habits (for example, smoking) or are

             confronted with particular people in their daily life (such as neighbors, family, or workplace colleagues) [Slama,
             Chiang and Enarson, 2007]. When an individual feels close to people in the same situations, this is an indicator that
             trust has arisen form these social networks [Li, Pickles and Savage, 2005].


             Social network sites are applications that allow users to build a semi-public or public profile within a bounded
             system, to create explicit linkages to other users and to communicate by sharing information or sending messages
             between each other. Organized around people, social network sites are structured as egocentric networks with the
             individual at the center of their personal network [Boyd and Ellison, 2007; Kaplan and Haenlein, 2010].


             Social Capital

             Rooted deeply in the social sciences, the concept of social capital has been addressed in the writings of leading
             authors in sociology, including Durkheim, Simmel, Marx and Weber [Hyyppä, 2010]. Social capital was
             (re)introduced by sociologists Bourdieu [1986] and Coleman [1988] in the 1980s. The subsequent work of the
             political scientist Robert D. Putnam and in particular his often-cited book Bowling Alone, in which Putnam [2001]



              Volume 32                         Article 5
138
argues that the decline of social capital in the United States resulted in an increased interest in―and application

of―social capital theory in other disciplines, such as the health-related sciences [Rostila 2011; Hyyppä 2010]. A
great number of different social capital notions illustrate the conceptual disagreements and confusion on the
concept. Some scholars consider social capital to be a collective and nonexclusive good attributed to social

structures (e.g., Putnam, 2001; Putnam, Leonardi and Nanetti, 1994). However, in sociology, the concept is
considered to be an individual-level resource and, thus, seen as a feature of individual actors within a social
structure [Bourdieu, 1986; Lin, 2001b; Coleman, 1988; Rostila, 2010b]. Examining the relationship between
individuals’ online social connections, health-related behaviors and health status, this research is grounded in Lin’s

network-based notion of social capital. Lin defines social capital as “resources embedded in one’s social network,
resources that can be accessed or mobilized through ties in the network” [2001b, p. 29].


Patterns of relationships define the structure of social networks in which different types of resources and social
capital are embedded. Commonly, social resources are classified into four categories [Rostila, 2011]:

       Informational support refers to information, knowledge and advice circulating in the network.

       Emotional support ensures that persons feel loved, admired and respected.

       Instrumental support describes help with tangible needs, such as money.

       Appraisal support refers to assistance with decision-making or giving feedback.


The preceding types of resources are provided by different kinds of relationships. Formal and weak social ties are
more likely to generate informational support, whereas informal and strong social ties are associated with the
provision of emotional support [Rostila, 2011].


With regard to the different forms of social capital, Putnam et al. [1994] differentiate between bonding and bridging
social capital, as shown in Figure 2.


















                        Figure 2. Types of Social Capital (Adapted from Hyyppä, 2010, p. 15)

Bonding social capital overlaps with the idea of strong ties. Being inward-looking, it is based on networks of people

featuring a high degree of homogeneity, expressed in similar interests and characteristics and supports individuals in
“getting by” in life [Stone and Hughes, 2002]. Bridging social capital, however, is outward-looking and based on
networks with weak ties. It connects heterogeneous people across social groups and provides access to sets of non-
redundant resources. It has been argued that weak social ties provide better opportunities for the achievement of

informational and instrumental resources, for instance, job-related information, when helping individuals “get ahead.”
Yet not all bridging links are equally useful [Lin, 2001b]. In the case of job seeking, for instance, a weak tie contact
may be particularly valuable if the contact person is in a more influential and powerful position than the job seeker

[Avenarius, 2010].

In this article, we concentrate on the influence of online social networks on health-related behavior using the concept
of social capital. The question of whether the Internet carries social capital is not a new one. Lin [2001b] suggested

that the connections in the virtual world could lead to a rise of social capital due to the increased access to
information for―at least theoretically―everyone. Further, people are enabled to connect with fewer time and space
constraints.


Since Lin's statement in 2001, there has been a debate among scholars concerning how online interactions
influence social capital. Summarizing the body of literature on the subject, Ellison, Lampe, Steinfield and Vitak
[2010] identified three major directions:



                                                                          Volume 32                          Article 5
                                                                                                                                  139
                 1.   Internet use allows people to generate new social capital, for example, by triggering interaction with

                      previously unknown people.

                 2.   Internet use decreases people’s stock of social capital, for example, by detracting people from face-to-face
                      interaction.

                 3.   Internet use strengthens people’s offline social network and supports the individual in maintaining existing
                      relationships, for example, by enhancing traditional means of communication.


             In the more recent literature, online social connections and particularly activities in social network sites, such as
             Facebook, are considered to have a positive impact on social capital [Antoci, Sabatini and Sodini, 2011; Ellison,
             Steinfield and Lampe, 2011; Young, 2011]. They play an important role facilitating people to keep in touch with the

             existing offline social network and are useful for the development of new ties, too. Yet, most online ties are based on
             some kind of previous offline connection [Ellison, Steinfield and Lampe, 2007; Antoci et al., 2011; Brandtzæg and
             Nov, 2010]. Social network sites are regarded as particularly advantageous in that they allow users to create and
             maintain large and diffuse networks in a convenient way and enable an easy way to communicate with friends in

             distant locations [Antoci et al., 2011]. As social capital does not require close friendship, even weak ties in social
             network sites are likely to have a positive impact on social capital [Ellison et al., 2010].


             A number of studies, primarily conducted using the social network site Facebook, have sought to identify the
             association between social network site use and social capital [Brandtzæg and Nov, 2010; Burke, Kraut and Marlow,
             2011; Ellison et al., 2007; Vitak, Ellison and Steinfield, 2011].


             The above-stated advantages regarding social network sites have been suggested to have a specifically positive
             impact on the formation and enhancement of bridging social capital, for example, by allowing contact maintenance
             with larger and more diverse groups of acquaintances [Young, 2011]. Examining the relationships between

             Facebook use and the formation and maintenance of bridging, bonding and maintained social capital in a cross-
             sectional [Ellison et al., 2007] and longitudinal study [Steinfield, Ellison and Lampe, 2008], the authors found
             Facebook use to be a predictor of bridging social capital. Due to its inclusion of identity information in the users'
             profile pages, interests and mutual friends, it may be feasible to use Facebook to connect users with shared

             interests and encourage the conversion of latent ties into weak ties, which in turn increases bridging social capital
             [Ellison et al., 2011]. Exploring the relationship between different Facebook elements, such as wall posts, status
             updates and direct messaging, Yoder and Stutzman [2011] suggested the intensity of Facebook use to be positively

             associated with perceived bridging social capital and wall posts to be a predictor of perceived bridging social capital.
             Moreover, perceived bridging social capital appears to be related to the number of Facebook friends [Brandtzæg
             and Nov, 2010].


             Facebook use appears to have a limited impact on the creation and maintenance of bonding social capital [Ellison et
             al., 2007; Steinfield et al., 2008; Burke, Marlow and Lento, 2011]. Yet the social network site is regarded as useful, in
             that it provides another way for the interaction with strong ties, especially when face-to-face interaction is not

             feasible, due to close friends and family being geographically dispersed [Vitak et al., 2011]. Examining the
             relationship between different kinds of online social network activities and social well-being, Burke, Marlow and
             Lento [2010] found that one-on-one communication in Facebook is associated with increased perceived bonding
             social capital and lower loneliness.


             Several studies suggest that Facebook may be particularly beneficial for users who are “network disadvantaged” or
             have a low self-esteem or low satisfaction, as it appears to lower barriers of interaction that under-confident people

             or people with lower communication skills might experience in offline situations [Ellison et al., 2007; Steinfield et al.,
             2008; Burke et al., 2011]. The term network disadvantaged generally refers to members of social networks poorer
             than others in social resources [Rostila, 2010a]. Applied to different contexts, it may refer to disadvantaged
             neighborhoods with lack of contact to individuals representing mainstream society, including members of low

             socioeconomic groups [Haines, Beggs and Hurlbert, 2011; Rostila, 2010a].

             In an organizational context, Steinfield, DiMicco, Ellison and Lampe [2009] found that the use of an internal social

             network site provided greater social capital benefits for employees in otherwise “network disadvantaged” positions,
             especially newer and younger employees and those employees in a hierarchically lower position. In this study,
             networks of individuals consuming unhealthy food or not engaging in physical activity are considered to be
             disadvantaged networks.


             Social network sites may be a viable source of especially bridging social capital for people who are otherwise
             “network disadvantaged.”




              Volume 32                          Article 5
140
Ellison et al. [2010] suggest five mechanisms of social capital generation on Facebook:

    1.  Maintenance of a larger and more diverse set of weak ties

    2.  Making ephemeral ties persistent

    3.  Lower costs of maintaining (or re-engaging) weak ties

    4.  Lower barriers of initial interaction and facilitation of formation of common ground due to inclusion of profile
        information

    5.  Easier information and support seeking, easier provision of resources to others


This research considers social capital as an inherent property of social networks and employs social network
concepts and methodology to measure individual social capital [Borgatti, Jones and Everett, 1998; Lakon, Godette
and Hipp, 2008; Lin, Cook and Burt, 2001; Moore, Shiell, Hawe and Haines, 2005]. Social capital measures may be

based on social network structure, presence of specific alters, volume, diversity and social resources, for instance.

Health-related Outcomes of Social Capital

More recent literature reviews highlight the association between social capital and health [Kim, Subramanian and
Kawachi, 2008; Almedom and Glandon, 2008; Lindström, 2008].


In addition, social capital has been identified as one determinant of population health [Hyyppä, 2010], since it
enables a comprehensive understanding of the link between social relationships and health [Rostila, 2008]. Further,
as access to information and affective support leads to a greater sense of belonging, social capital is positively

associated with individual health outcomes [Moore, 2010]. In fact, Moore [2010] goes so far as to highlight that
individual access to social capital is not limited to people who are geographically close and that some people may
have better access than others to socially valued resources.


Lin [2001a] suggests that individuals have unequal access to the resources embedded in a social network.
Depending on their structural and positional embeddedness, individuals are enabled or disabled to mobilize social
capital for purposive actions. The mobilized social capital determines the returns and may impact an individual’s

physical health and mental health, as shown in Figure 3.

To understand the relationship between social capital in online social networks and health outcomes, this research
considers the structural and positional embeddedness of individuals in online social networks and examines the

quality and quantity of accessible resources and how individuals use these resources.

Drawing on Portes’ work [1998] on the potential downside of social capital, Rostila [2011] argues that having a high
degree of closure and density might limit an individual’s access to socially valued resources. These networks have

few bridging links to outside social structures and show a high degree of interconnectedness among their members.
























                      Figure 3. Modeling a Theory of Social Capital (Adapted from Lin, 2001a)





                                                                          Volume 32                          Article 5
                                                                                                                                  141
             Investigating a network of migrants in Sweden, Rostila [2010a] shows how closed network structures contribute to

             the exchange of “bad social capital” by producing and maintaining negative norms and behaviors. Stating that a
             closed network may be at a greater risk of producing negative health externalities, Rostila’s point of view is contrary
             to Coleman’s theory of functional social capital [Coleman, 1988, 1994], which accentuates the need for closed
             network structures and social trust to achieve beneficial health outcomes and well-being.


             The Internet connects individuals with similar interests via online communities. Providing social support [Hwang,
             Ottenbacher, Green, Cannon-Diehl, Richardson, Bemstam and Thomas, 2010] and informational support, online

             health communities allow people to seek information, communicate with others with the same or similar diseases,
             share health guidance and compare treatment and medication strategies. The accessibility from everywhere at
             anytime, the anonymity of the medium, as well as the access to greater expertise, are regarded as the main benefits
             of online health communities [Maloney-Krichmar and Preece, 2002]. Having studied an online health community for

             two and a half years, Maloney-Krichmar and Preece [2005] state that this community provided access to bonding
             social capital (e.g., in the form of emotional support), as well as bridging social capital by linking members to diverse
             sets of resources.


             Description and Discussion of Existing Social Capital Frameworks
             Hyyppä [2010] describes and critically evaluates social capital frameworks created by global organizations, such as

             the World Bank, the WHO, the Offices for National Statistics of the UK, New Zealand and Australia. Since Hyyppä
             [2010] explicitly recommends the framework of the Policy Research Initiative (PRI) for studying relations among
             social networks, social capital and health, the social capital framework of the PRI [2005] will be described and

             discussed in the following section.

             Social Capital Framework of the Policy Research Initiative in Canada

             The Policy Research Initiative (PRI) wanted to look at how social networks, positions of members within these
             networks and their interactions shape the nature and circulation of social resources within the network. Considering
             social networks as the central element of social capital, the PRI constructed their framework based on the
             operational definition of social capital as “social networks that may provide access to resources and social support”

             [PRI, 2005, p. 7]. Figure 4 presents the framework of the PRI. It distinguishes social capital (social networks) from its
             sources (determinants) on the individual level or group level. The generated social capital leads to different kinds of
             resources and support shaping social, economic, as well as health, outcomes. The framework uses indicators and

             measurement tools drawn from the field of social network analysis that differentiate between the structure of
             networks (characteristics of networks, members and relationships) and their dynamics (conditions for creation and
             mobilization). The PRI framework suggests that social capital―and thus the resources―operate among people with
             complementary resources (e.g., financial capital) in a specific situation or context.































                                Figure 4. Social Capital Framework of the PRI (Adapted from PRI, 2005, p. 9)



              Volume 32                          Article 5
142
The recommended indicators of network properties, member characteristics and relational properties, as well as

corresponding hypotheses are listed in Table 1 [PRI, 2005].

                            Table 1: Measuring Social Capital Through Network Structure

     Indicators    Description                                Hypotheses
     Network       Number of people with whom                   Larger networks are associated with a higher

     size          individuals maintain different types of       probability for availability and accessibility of a
                   relationships (friends, family,               particular resource.
                   acquaintances, neighbors, colleagues,        Smaller networks are related to less access to
                   etc.)
                                                                 resources.
     Network       Degree of interconnections among the         The higher the interconnectedness, the more the
     density       members of a network                          network is closed (exclusive) and the more

                                                                 homogeneous the resources within the network.
     Network       Heterogeneity of the socioeconomic           Strong social homogeneity creates bonding
     diversity     status of the members                         relations providing access to important resources
   Network structure
                                                                 and allowing individuals to get by.
                                                                Weak social homogeneity creates bridging relations
                                                                 providing access to new and diverse resources and
                                                                 allowing individuals to get ahead.

     Relational    Number and duration of contacts              Relational frequency and the number of contacts of
     frequency     among the members of a network                individuals help to assess their level of “sociability.”
     Relational    Strength and nature of a relationship in
                                                                Strong ties will lead to exchange of resources
     intensity     terms of emotional investment                 requiring a significant emotional, financial, or time
                                                                 investment.
                                                                Weak ties or bridging ties provide access to varied

                                                                 and nonredundant resources.
     Spatial       Number of contacts with whom                 Ties occurring at geographic proximity significantly
   Neproximityamicsindividuals maintain face-to-face             contribute to social capital.

                   relationships on a regular basis

For the construction of the conceptual model in this article, the PRI’s framework is valuable in that it allows the

analysis of how resources are distributed, the availability of specific types of resources and how social networks
contribute to health outcomes. Illustrating relationships between important variables in the context of social
networks, social capital and health, as well as providing hypotheses and recommendations for indicators, the
framework of the PRI forms the basis of the conceptual model developed in this article. Yet this study does not

equate social capital with social networks.

Framework for Measuring Social Capital in Online Communities

Seeking to explore social capital within online communities, Smith, Giraud-Carrier and Purser [2009] developed a
framework that has been applied to quantitatively determine social capital, among others in the blogosphere [Smith,
Giraud-Carrier and Purser, 2008] and on Twitter [Smith and Giraud-Carrier, 2010].


According to Smith [2008], social capital in a community is based on relationships, individuals’ attributes and the
available social resources. Due to the specific characteristics of ties within social media, Smith [2008] makes a

distinction between two types of connections:

    1.  Explicit connections are well-defined ties between individuals; for example, “is a friend of.” Individuals are
        aware of those explicit ties among themselves.

    2.  Implicit connections link individuals together based on affinities or similarities, such as shared interests,
        attitudes, or hobbies. Individuals are not necessarily aware of the similarities existing among themselves.
        Implicit edges are calculated using measures of similarity between nodes.


Based on these two types of connections, explicit social networks and implicit affinity networks are introduced as the
main framework components. Explicit social networks and implicit affinity networks are regarded as complementary.


Figure 5 visualizes the combination of the two different network types within a so-called hybrid network.







                                                                          Volume 32                          Article 5
                                                                                                                                  143
                                                                               0.5
                                                           Bob                                 Ed
                                                                  0.33

                                                      0.33


                                                                          Cheryl
                                                  Amy
                                                               1.0

                                                                                   0.5
                                                                                               Dan
                                                                      0.5


                                                 implicit affinity network
                                                 explicit social network


                        Figure 5. Hybrid Network―Explicit Social Network and Implicit Affinity Network Combined

                                          (Adapted from Smith, Giraud-Carrier and Purser, 2009)


             The dotted lines in Figure 5 show the implicit affinity network. Ranging between [0,1], the numbers indicate the
             degree of similarity between two people. The solid lines depict the explicit social network. For example, Amy and
             Cheryl are explicitly connected and show a maximum degree of similarity (1.0). In contrast, Cheryl and Bob are
             neither friends nor very similar to each other (0.33).


             Implicit connections are perceived as important in social capital, yet social capital can be accessed and mobilized
             only when individuals are aware of it and create explicit connections between them [Smith, Giraud-Carrier and

             Purser, 2008].

             Potential bonding or potential bridging social capital occurs when there are no explicit links between two people who

             show some degree of similarity. Realized bonding or realized bridging social capital occurs only in explicit social
             networks when declared connections are present among individuals. Regarding bonding and bridging social capital
             as complementary rather than exclusive, Smith [2009] suggests that many groups in networks serve both functions.
             Yet networks as a whole could be classified as being bonding or bridging.


             The framework of Smith and Giraud-Carrier [2010] is valuable in that it includes latent ties [Haythornthwaite, 2002]
             as implicit connections and distinguishes between potential and realized social capital. Implicit connections, for

             example, friends of friends with similar attributes, are widely present in social media, such as social network sites
             and may, just as explicit connections, influence individuals via a mutual friend. The discovery of implicit links may be
             more likely on a social network site like Facebook, as individuals can easily obtain information on friends of friends

             or passively consume comments from friends of friends in their newsfeed. Due to implicit links being somewhat more
             accessible and closer to individuals than in the real world, they may also influence their health-related behaviors and
             body weight.


             Yet, Smith and Giraud-Carrier’s [2010] understanding of bonding social capital should be regarded critically. In the
             framework, bonding and bridging social capital are based on the similarity and dissimilarity strength of individuals.
             Yet, as discussed above, bonding social capital incorporates many other aspects, such as strong ties and closeness

             between people [Putnam et al., 1994], which may not be reflected by a measure of similarity only.

             Thus, the conceptual model introduced in the next section will go beyond a quantitative measure of similarity and

             include other indicators of bonding social capital, such as the previously mentioned indicators of intimacy and
             closeness to determine tie strength, too.


             IV. KEY CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE CONCEPTUAL MODEL
             In order to develop our conceptual model, we looked closely at the key considerations emerging from the literature.

             The objective of this article is to develop and describe a conceptual model that draws a relation between the
             structure and content of an individual’s online social network, the resulting opportunities and limitations to accessing
             resources and his or her health-related behaviors and body weight. Due to this study’s focus on online social

             connections, the conceptual model should reflect the specific characteristics of online social networks and enable
             the determination of individuals’ social capital through the analysis of personal network data. Moreover, the model



              Volume 32                          Article 5
144
should acknowledge the necessity of a mixed methods approach applying both quantitative methods to determine

social capital through the network structure and qualitative methods to examine the content of social relations more
deeply [Kneidinger, 2010].


Based on the literature review, Table 2 provides an overview of content-related and methodological key
considerations for the construction of the conceptual model and research design in this study. Contentwise, previous
studies on the association between social capital and health overemphasized the positive impact of social capital
and neglected the potential damaging effects [Kawachi, Subramanian and Kim, 2008]. For instance, bonding social

capital may prohibit an effective health promotion in disadvantaged communities, as it possibly limits the access to
bridging social capital outside their social milieu [Kim, Subramanian and Kawachi, 2008; Kawachi et al., 2008]. Thus,
future studies should distinguish between the effects of bonding versus bridging capital [Kim et al., 2008] and

examine the different implications of being well-connected in a disadvantaged network vs. being well- (or even
loosely) connected in an advantaged network [Moore, 2010]. In online social networks, research should analyze how
ideas and opinions diffused in online social networks influence individuals’ offline social networks [Bollen,
Goncalves, Ruan and Mao, 2011; Young, 2011].


                       Table 2: Addressed Gaps and Key Considerations for This Research

  Content   Consideration of possibly negative effects of social capital [Kawachi et al., 2008]

            Distinction between the possibly different effects of bonding and bridging social capital [Kim et al.,
            2008]

            Different implications of being well-connected in a disadvantaged network vs. being well- or even
            loosely connected in an advantaged network [Moore, 2010]

            Impacts of different relationships on health-related behavior and body weight [Moore, 2010]

            Consideration of different aspects of online relationships that go beyond the concept of strong and
            weak ties [Ellison et al., 2011]

            Evaluation of the quality of social capital built online to understand how individuals support each other

            [Young, 2011]
            Influence of opinions and ideas within online social networks on an individual’s behavior in “real life”

            [Bollen et al., 2011; Young, 2011]
  Method    Need for longitudinal data [Kim et al., 2008; Hyyppä, 2010; Moore, 2010]

            Applications of network-based measures is recommended [Kawachi et al., 2008]

            Use of tools not based on surveys and self-reported data [Ellison et al., 2011; Vitak et al., 2011]

            Consideration of more diverse populations [Ellison et al., 2010; Steinfield et al., 2008; Burke et al.,
            2010]

            Refinement of measures for online ties is needed [Ellison et al., 2011]

            Need for longitudinal studies [Steinfield et al., 2009; Burke et al., 2010; Ellison et al., 2011; Vitak et al.,
            2011]


With regard to the methodology, the lack of longitudinal data has been identified as a major issue. The cross-
sectional nature of most studies makes it difficult to establish causality, in that it cannot be determined whether

social capital is a consequence of good health or vice versa [Kim et al., 2008; Hyyppä, 2010; Moore, 2010].
Moreover, the application of the network theory of social capital and, thus, network-based measures may prove
more accurate in assessing a person’s resource accessibility and measuring the positive and negative effects of

social capital on health [Lakon et al., 2008; Moore, Daniel, Paquet, Dubé and Gauvin, 2009b; Bourdieu, 1986; Lin,
2001b]. Online tools applying network-based measures could minimize the noise of self-reported data produced
through the use of questionnaires in previous studies [Ellison et al., 2011; Vitak et al., 2011]. Moreover, future
studies in online social networks should look at more diverse populations and tools to measure social capital and

communication practices should be refined, for example, by analyzing postings on the site, as well as server-level
data [Ellison et al., 2010].


Establishing the theoretical groundwork for this research, this article concentrates on content-related considerations.
The proposed conceptual model is intended to explain the influence of online social networks on an individual’s
health-related behaviors and bodyweight. Findings on this relationship will inform the development of possible online
intervention strategies.




                                                                         Volume 32                          Article 5
                                                                                                                                145
              V. PROPOSED CONCEPTUAL MODEL
              Integrating the previously presented information, the proposed conceptual model (Figure 6) shows how different

              variables may influence people’s health-related behaviors and body weight.


                                   Online Social Networks                    Social Capital                 Health




                                               Network
                                               structure
                                               Openness
                                                Closure
                                                                                Realized
                                                                                bonding /
                                                                                bridging                     Health-
                                                                                                             related
                                             Network ties                     social capital                behaviors
                                               Strong ties

                                               Weak ties
                                               Latent ties

                                                                                Potential

                                                                              social capital
                                               Network
                                               members                                                     Body weight
                                             Homogeneity
                                             Heterogeneity







                                             Individual

                                             attributes




                                                       Figure 6. Proposed Conceptual Model


              Including three network constructs―network structure, network ties and network members―the proposed
              conceptual model enables the analysis of both network locations and resources embedded in the network [Lin,
              2001a]. The former is covered by measures determining the degree of network openness/closure and the relative
              importance of strong and weak ties. The embedded resources may be determined using the degree of network

              homogeneity/heterogeneity which allows the analysis of the range, variety and composition of resources accessible
              to an individual. Additionally, latent ties, which are technically possible online social connections but not yet activated
              [Haythornthwaite, 2002], are recognized as a specific feature of online social networks which may, just as explicit

              strong or weak ties, influence the nature of the embedded resources.

              The conceptual model is based on Lin’s notion of social capital: Social capital refers to resources embedded in
              social networks maintained by individuals which can be accessed or mobilized through ties in the network and

              generate returns [Lin, 2001a]. It incorporates elements from both of the social capital frameworks discussed in the
              previous section. Similar to the social capital framework of the PRI [2005], the conceptual model developed in this
              article distinguishes between the sources (determinants) and effects of social capital and uses indicators and

              measurement tools drawn from the field of social network analysis. Contrary to the social capital notion of the PRI, in
              this study, social capital is not equated with social networks, but social networks are considered to be a precondition
              of social capital and place where social capital emerges [Rostila, 2011]. Like the framework of Smith, Giraud-Carrier
              and Purser [2009] for measuring social capital in online communities, the conceptual model differentiates between

              realized social capital and potential social capital. Besides explicit connections, users of online social networks may
              have implicit access to a broad range of latent ties forming their potential social capital which may―in addition to
              realized social capital―shape their attitudes and exert influence on their health-related behaviors and thus the

              individual health outcome. Contrary to Smith’s work, this study suggests that bonding or bridging social capital can
              be determined only by analyzing interactions happening along explicitly declared ties in online social networks.


              Volume 32                           Article 5
146
Therefore, the conceptual model differentiates between realized bonding and bridging social capital but does not

include this distinction for potential social capital.

Health-related behaviors and body weight are recognized as the returns or effects of different social capital types.

The conceptual model’s dependent variable is the body weight of the observed individual. The variance of the body
weight is attempted to be explained by the independent variables. These include individual attributes, network
structure, network ties, network members, realized bonding/bridging social capital, potential social capital and the
individual’s health-related behaviors.


The variables can be grouped in the three categories of online social networks, social capital and health as
presented in Table 3.


                                         Table 3: Categories of Variables
                        Category                    Variables

                        Online social networks        Network structure
                                                      Network ties
                                                      Network members

                                                      Individual attributes
                        Social capital                 Realized bonding social capital
                                                       Realized bridging social capital

                                                       Potential social capital
                        Health                         Health-related behaviors

                                                       Body weight

Organized according to the categorization in Table 3, the subsequent sections discuss the relationships among the
independent variables and establish how they are related to the dependent variable. Moreover, the article’s main

research question, “How do the properties and thus available resources in an individual’s online social network
influence his or her health-related behaviors and body weight?,” is divided into six sub-questions. These questions
are presented for the different parts of the conceptual model.


Online Social Networks
Network Structure

The construct network structure includes measurement items such as network size, density, cliques, brokerage and
constraint [ABS, 2004; Berkman et al., 2000; Burt, 2001; PRI, 2005; Borgatti et al., 1998].


Using methods from the field of social network analysis, these structural properties are calculated mainly to
determine the degree of network openness/closure. The network structure may be connected with the explicit and
implicit ties and the network homogeneity/heterogeneity, too. For instance, high network density may be a predictor

of a rather closed and homogeneous network with strong ties among members [Berkman et al., 2000; PRI, 2005].

The network openness/closure is hypothesized to interact with the other three online social network characteristics.

As discussed before, closed networks may overlap with strong ties and a higher degree of network homogeneity,
whereas, in open networks, the level of interconnections among members is suggested to be lower and the
exchanged resources more diverse [PRI, 2005]. The online social network of an individual who has ties to a
bounded community only; for example, family and friends of their hometown, may be very dense, as a high

proportion of these people will know each other. They may also have similar backgrounds, as they attended the
same school, were members of the same associations, etc. [ABS, 2004]. Contrary, the online social networks of a
person who has lived in different places or has many different interests, which is likely to be more open, have a
higher number of weak ties and people from different backgrounds.

    RQ1. How is the degree of network openness/closure related to an individual’s health-related behaviors and

    body weight?

Findings from the literature suggest that closed networks, particularly when interacting with a high degree of network
homogeneity, are more likely than open networks to produce and maintain negative norms and behaviors leading to

negative health outcomes [Rostila, 2011]. In this study, networks of individuals consuming unhealthy food or not
engaging in physical activity are considered to be disadvantaged networks. An elevated body weight and, thus, a
person being overweight or obese, is recognized as a negative health outcome.





                                                                         Volume 32                         Article 5
                                                                                                                               147
             Network Ties

             Due to ties in online social networks being indistinguishable with respect to their strength [Lewis, Kaufman,
             Gonzalez, Wimmer and Christakis, 2008], it is important to identify meaningful relations. To be considered as

             meaningful, there should be some kind of activity, among others the exchange of wall posts or comments,
             happening along the ties [Wilson, Boe, Sala, Puttaswamy and Zhao, 2009]. These could be classified as strong or
             weak ties in a next step. Passive ties which are explicitly declared, but not really used, may automatically be
             considered to be weak ties. Allowing for passive consumption, they are suggested to have an indirect influence on

             individuals.

             Strong and weak ties are determined by considering the online social network’s relational properties. The construct,

             network ties, examines the network’s composition, tie multiplexity, duration of a contact and communication mode,
             as well as the intimacy and intensity of a contact [Berkman et al., 2000; ABS, 2004; PRI, 2005]. Looking at the
             network composition enables the identification of family members, friends, or colleagues in an individual’s online
             social network and provides information on the context and role in which persons have become acquainted. It is also

             connected to the determination of multiplex ties, which are based on knowing a person in more than one relationship
             context, for instance, colleagues who are good friends at the same time. Multiplexity is an indicator of tie strength
             [Granovetter, 1973], yet the intimacy, intensity and duration of a contact are the best variables to predict tie strength

             in online social networks [Gilbert and Karahalios, 2009].

             According to Kaplan and Haenlein [2010], the intimacy and immediacy of a communication mode influence the
             degree of social presence that can be achieved between two communication partners. Interpersonal and

             synchronous forms of communication are suggested to induce a higher degree of social presence than are mediated
             and asynchronous communications [Kaplan and Haenlein, 2010]. Even though all communications within online
             social networks are mediated to some extent, directed communication, like the exchange of personal messages,

             may be considered as more interpersonal than undirected messages such as status updates [Burke et al., 2011].
             Synchronous forms of communication, for example, live chat, are featured in social network sites such as Facebook.
             Being linked to a higher social presence, they may exert more social influence [Kaplan and Haenlein, 2010].


             Measuring variables related to network ties requires a mixed methods approach. (Qualitative) ethnographic research
             methods can be used to explore the content of social relations in online social networks [Hine, 2008], while
             quantitative procedures, such as text mining, may be feasible to determine the attitudes of individuals or to detect

             intimacy words [Bodendorf and Kaiser, 2009; Gilbert and Karahalios, 2009].

             Implicit (latent) ties could refer to all possible online social connections of an individual. Theoretically, connections

             between all Facebook members are technically feasible but not necessarily declared. However, in this research,
             latent ties will refer only to online social connections of friends of the observed individual. Thus, besides personal
             network data of the individual, the analysis of the online social networks of friends would be required as well. Here,
             the consideration of the friends’ strong ties is recommended, as the observed individual may be likely to be

             confronted with, for example, wall posts exchanged between a friend and his or her close friends. Also, the individual
             may be likely to meet these close friends of a friend at some point in real life, which could lead to the conversion of
             this latent tie into a weak tie in the online social network.


             Similar to the degree of network openness/closure, the network characteristics of strong/weak ties and latent ties are
             suggested to interact with the other online social network characteristics. For instance, strong ties could interact with
             network homogeneity, in that the observed individual has strong ties to members who are similar to him or her

             [Lakon et al., 2008].

                 RQ2. How are strong and weak ties related to an individual’s health-related behaviors and body weight?

             With regard to the relationships among social capital, mastery and education, Moore, Daniel, Gauvin and Dubé
             [2009a] found that lower-educated individuals relied more on family and friends for access to social resources and

             had less weak ties than higher-educated individuals. Transferred to the context of this study, it could be
             hypothesized that individuals with an elevated body weight are more dependent on their strong ties and have less
             contact with their weak ties than normal-weight individuals.


             Network Members
             The construct network members considers the same measurement items as the construct individual attributes

             described in the next section. For each member of the observed individual’s online social network, socio-
             demographic variables, such as age, gender and profession, as well as his or her interests and activities, need to be
             identified. The degree of similarity among the network members with respect to different attributes determines the

             network’s homogeneity/heterogeneity [ABS, 2004; PRI, 2005].


              Volume 32                          Article 5
148
In combination with the previously discussed strong and weak ties, it will be interesting to see whether individuals

communicate most frequently with people from similar backgrounds. Also, it can be determined whether a person’s
strong ties are concentrated in particular groups consisting of diverse people sharing a common interest, for
example, a sports club or choir, or rather exist between family members who tend to be more homogeneous [ABS,
2004].

    RQ3. How is the degree of network homogeneity/heterogeneity related to an individual’s health-related

    behaviors and body weight?

Moore et al. [2009b] found that individuals with diverse social networks had a lower risk of overweight and obesity. It

could be hypothesized that the networks of individuals in different body weight ranges exhibit different degrees of
network homogeneity. Also, in disadvantaged networks, a higher degree of network homogeneity may increase the
risk of unhealthy behaviors and an elevated body weight.


Individual Attributes
Similar to the construct network members, the construct individual attributes includes socio-demographic
measurement items [PRI, 2005], such as a person’s age, gender and profession, as well as his or her interests,

activities and intensity of Facebook usage.

Individual attributes are suggested to influence the online social network characteristics, health-related behaviors

and the individual health outcome.

Findings from previous studies suggest that a person’s online social network is mainly based on offline connections
and mirrors the wider offline social network of a person [Boyd and Ellison, 2007]. Thus, people who have got to

know many people due to having a number of different interests and activities or lived in different places may have a
larger and less dense online social network allowing them to maintain many weak ties. Online social network
characteristics may also be influenced by a person’s age, gender and social network site usage. A major part of U.S.
Facebook users, for instance, are between eighteen and thirty-four years [Smith, 2010]. The number of Facebook

friends and Facebook activity can be assumed to be related to age, too. Teenagers and people in their Twenties
tend to have most friends and to be the most active group on Facebook [Zarrella, 2010].


Individual attributes are considered to be a predictor of a person’s health-related behaviors and body weight. Despite
people’s social environment being recognized as a major determinant of their health-related behaviors, their
engagement in physical activity and eating habits are also shaped by individual preferences that are not necessarily
dependent on their social networks. For instance, some people may enjoy sports even if their family and close

friends are not sporty at all.

Regarding the relationship between individual attributes and a person’s body weight, socio-demographic variables,

such as a person’s age and gender, are suggested to influence a person’s body weight. Therefore, a relationship
between individual attributes and a person’s body weight needs to be examined.

Social Capital

The four online social network characteristics are related to either realized bonding/bridging social capital or
potential social capital.


Realized Bonding or Bridging Social Capital
Bonding social capital occurs in homogeneous groups of people sharing similar interests or characteristics whereas

bridging social capital is associated with networks with weak ties between heterogeneous people. Classifying
bonding or bridging social capital in an individual’s online social network can be done using the previously described
online social network characteristics. A high degree of network closure, high reliance of the individual on strong tie

contacts and high degree of network homogeneity are suggested to predict bonding social capital [Rostila, 2011]. On
the contrary, open networks increase bridging social capital by allowing individuals to establish new links which may
provide access to more diverse resources [PRI, 2005].


Potential Social Capital
Potential social capital is suggested to result from the latent ties―that is, the strong tie contacts of explicit online

connections―in an individual’s online social network. The observed individual may passively consume information
produced by these latent ties, for example, by following wall posts between friends of friends, photo comments, etc.
In relation to explicit bonding or bridging social capital, potential social capital is suggested to be less influential. Yet,
due to its higher accessibility in online social networks, it should be examined in more detail.



                                                                          Volume 32                          Article 5
                                                                                                                                  149
             Health
             Health-related Behavior

             The construct health-related behaviors examines individuals’ diet and their engagement in physical activity. People’s
             dietary behavior may be determined by considering their servings of fruit and vegetables per week. Physical activity
             is assessed by instances of different kinds of sports per week [Moore et al., 2009b].


             Individual behaviors, lifestyle choices and preferences are subject to social influences. People’s social environment
             may enable or constrain the adoption of health-promoting behaviors [McNeill et al., 2006], as indicated by the arrows
             between realized bonding/bridging or potential social capital and health-related behaviors.


             Findings from the literature suggest that bonding social capital may be associated with detrimental health effects,
             especially when individuals maintain bonding relations in disadvantaged, homogeneous and closed communities
             [Rostila, 2010a]. Thus, it could be theorized that people using social network sites to primarily interact with strong tie

             contacts may be more likely to practice unhealthy behaviors, especially when their strong tie contacts have an
             unhealthy lifestyle. Contrary, the possibly more diverse online social networks of active people who are members of
             sports clubs or other societies may provide access to more bridging social capital [ABS, 2004]. Potential social

             capital could influence an individual’s health-related behaviors, too. Following people regularly exchanging
             information on sports activities may spark an individual’s interest in a sport or motivate him or her to engage in
             sports more often.

                 RQ4. How does bonding social capital influence an individual’s health-related behaviors and body weight?


             Being based on rather closed and homogeneous networks with strong ties [Rostila, 2011], bonding social capital
             reflects the co-occurrence of three out of four online social network characteristics. It also includes the principle of
             homophily which refers to the tendency of people to interact and have the closest ties with people who are similar to
             them [Lakon et al., 2008]. It is possible that individuals with an elevated body weight feel more comfortable when

             interacting with their family and close friends as they might experience a lower self-esteem due to their weight
             issues.

             Findings from the literature suggest that bonding social capital may be associated with detrimental health effects,

             especially when individuals maintain bonding relations in disadvantaged, homogeneous and closed communities
             [Rostila, 2010a].


             Yet, it can be hypothesized that the quality of bonding or bridging social capital matters. Frequent interaction with
             strong tie contacts does not necessarily have a bad influence on a person’s eating habits if these contacts set a
             positive example. For instance, frequent interactions within families practicing healthy behaviors should not have
             negative effects on an individual’s behavior. Rather, a downward leveling of social norms is suggested to occur in

             disadvantaged communities [Kawachi et al., 2008; Rostila, 2010a; Moore, 2010], which could―in this study―be
             translated into communities practicing unhealthy behaviors.

                 RQ5. How does bridging social capital influence an individual’s health-related behaviors and body weight?

             Literature suggests that bridging social capital occurring in heterogeneous networks with open circles and weak ties

             provides access to diverse sets of resources and may be an important force in health promotion [Kawachi et al.,
             2008]. Greater access to a variety of resources is associated with a lower risk of overweight and obesity [Moore et
             al., 2009b]. Being considered as especially useful for the formation and maintenance of bridging social capital
             [Young, 2011; Ellison, Steinfield and Lampe, 2007; Steinfield et al., 2008; Ellison et al., 2011; Yoder and Stutzman,

             2011; Brandtzæg and Nov, 2010], social network site activities may be beneficial to promote positive behaviors. In
             particular, this may be the case if individuals are confronted with bridging social connections acting as role models
             by posting about their sports activities, for instance.

                 RQ6. How are latent ties and potential social capital related to an individual’s health-related behaviors and
                 body weight?


             Due to online social networks being feasible to connect users with shared interests, latent ties may be considered as
             a pre-stage of explicit weak and―possibly future―strong ties [Ellison et al., 2011]. Resulting from latent ties,

             potential social capital may be regarded as a predictor of bridging social capital. Content provided by implicit
             connections can be consumed passively by the observed individual and may give them access to more diverse sets
             of resources. The association between indirect ties or potential social capital and health-outcomes has not been
             explored before.





              Volume 32                          Article 5
150
Bodyweight

The construct body weight is the dependent variable in this study. Besides individual attributes, such as gender and
age, that may influence an individual’s body weight, the conceptual model points to associations between the online

social network characteristics, as well as the health-related behaviors and body weight. A direct relationship
between different types of social capital and the body weight is not suggested. According to the conceptual model,
the described different forms of social capital may shape an individual’s health-related behaviors, which, in turn,
have an impact on a person’s body weight. Yet, the relationships between specific online social network

characteristics, for example, network closure or high degree of network homogeneity and a person’s health-related
behaviors and body weight should be examined separately. For instance, a closed network may be associated with
an elevated body weight. According to previous research, a diverse network may reduce the risk of overweight
individuals [Moore et al., 2009b]. With regard to ties within the online social network, higher social presence is

associated with a larger social influence that the communicating persons may exert on each other’s behavior
[Kaplan and Haenlein, 2010]. The ideas of social presence theory may thus be helpful to identify key
persons―specifically contacts with whom the individual communicates in a directed and synchronous way―in an
online social network. These contacts may have a possibly high influence on the individual’s health-related

behaviors and body weight.

The energy imbalance between consumed and expended calories is identified as the fundamental cause of obesity

by the WHO [2011a]. Thus, it is believed that people practicing healthy behaviors, for example, following a healthy
diet or exercising regularly, have a normal body weight, whereas people consuming unhealthy foods without doing
sports on a regular basis may have an elevated body weight.


VI. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

The presented conceptual model is literature-based and founded on the “offline” concept of social capital. It links
people’s social capital, which equals the resources embedded in their social networks [Lin, 2001b], with their health-
related behaviors and health status.


To the authors’ best knowledge, this conceptual model is the first one to transfer the linkage between people’s offline
social networks and health to online social networks. Establishing profound theoretical groundwork for future
research crossing the boundaries between information systems, health informatics and sociology, it uses network-
based measures to determine individual social capital and integrates the constructs latent ties and potential social

capital as specific characteristics of online social networks.

The contributions of this article need to be weighed up against its limitations. The underlying assumption in this

article is that sociological concepts such as social capital, as well as findings from literature addressing the
relationship between people’s (offline) social environment and their health status, may also be applicable to online
social networks.


Offering similar functionalities as unmediated spaces and displaying people’s extended offline social network, online
social networks exhibit a high similarity to offline social relationships and are primarily used to maintain and reinforce
existing offline relationships [Arnaboldi et al., 2011; Boyd and Ellison, 2007]. Therefore, we propose that online
social networks are an additional determinant of health-related behaviors and a person’s body weight and are

feasible for treatment and intervention. Using a Facebook application to collect user-related data, the validation of
the conceptual model―which is the next and mandatory step―will show whether our assumption is true.
Subsequently, the conceptual model will be tested, revisited and refined.


Provided that an association among people’s online social networks, their health-related behaviors and weight status
can be proved, future research could then explore the implicit influence of online social networks on people’s
behaviors in more detail.


On a generic level, future studies may look at the intersection―or boundary―between the “real world” and the
virtual world. There is evidence that online social networks shape people’s attitudes, beliefs and behaviors. Yet the
relative importance of real world social networks and online social networks is not clear. Who does affect our

behaviors? Is it the people we meet every day at work or are our―possibly distant―close friends, to whom we talk
through Facebook, more important?


If online social networks are an additional determinant of people’s health-related behaviors and weight status, it will
be interesting to see whether latent ties influence a person’s attitude and health-related behaviors at all or which
explicitly declared online social connections motivate people to practice a healthier lifestyle. The identification of




                                                                        Volume 32                         Article 5
                                                                                                                              151
             opinion leaders within personal online social networks could be one approach feasible to address this question

             [Bodendorf and Kaiser, 2009].

             Once more is known about the social forces operating within online social networks, a next step could involve the

             creation of network-driven strategies to promote and reinforce positive norms and health-related behaviors. There is
             evidence that weight management interventions should shift their focus to friends of friends and the wider social
             network of obese individuals [Bahr et al., 2009] and that strength of social influence in online social networks may be
             greater than in real-world social networks [Ma et al., 2010]. Thus, these studies may provide an interesting starting

             point for a “vaccination” of people against a “social infection” to stop the propagation of non-communicable diseases
             in (online) social networks [Gershenson, 2011; Ma et al., 2010].

             For instance, a Web application could support people in setting goals and create positive social pressure. Features

             fostering friendly competition among friends and friends of friends, for example, by enabling the comparison of
             sports results, as well as a reward system, may be feasible to reinforce positive behaviors. Focusing on personal
             attributes of the individuals, further research may also explore whether activity in social network sites or the usage of

             a Facebook application are particularly beneficial for people experiencing low self-esteem due to having weight
             issues.

             The issue of overweight and obesity will be the first one to be addressed within this research. Many economies have

             been struggling with a rising prevalence of a number of health and social issues. Once the conceptual model is
             validated, future research projects addressing other use cases such as depression, alcoholism [Rosenquist,
             Murabito, Fowler and Christakis, 2010; Christakis and Fowler, 2008], or gambling may benefit from the theories and
             methods developed in this article.


             REFERENCES

             Editor’s Note: The following reference list contains hyperlinks to World Wide Web pages. Readers who have the
             ability to access the Web directly from their word processor or are reading the article on the Web, can gain direct
             access to these linked references. Readers are warned, however, that:

                 1.  These links existed as of the date of publication but are not guaranteed to be working thereafter.
                 2.  The contents of Web pages may change over time. Where version information is provided in the
                     References, different versions may not contain the information or the conclusions referenced.
                 3.  The author(s) of the Web pages, not AIS, is (are) responsible for the accuracy of their content.

                 4.  The author(s) of this article, not AIS, is (are) responsible for the accuracy of the URL and version
                     information.

             ABS (2004) “Measuring Social Capital: An Australian Framework and Indicators”, Australian Bureau of Statistics,

                   http://www.ausstats.abs.gov.au/ausstats/free.nsf/Lookup/13C0688F6B98DD45CA256E360077D526/$File/137
                   80_2004.pdf (current Sep. 22, 2011).

             Almedom, A.M. and D. Glandon (2008) “Social Capital and Mental Health” in Kawachi, I., S.V. Subramanian and D.
                   Kim (eds.) Social Capital and Health, New York, NY: Springer, pp. 191–214.

             Antoci, A., F. Sabatini and M. Sodini (2011) “See You on Facebook! A Framework for Analyzing the Role of
                   Computer-mediated Interaction in the Evolution of Social Capital”, Munic Personal RePEc Archive,

                   http://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/29998/1/MPRA_paper_29998.pdf (current March 23, 2012).

             Arnaboldi, V., A. Passarella, M. Tesconi and D. Gazzè (2011) “Towards a Characterization of Egocentric Networks
                   in Online Social Networks”, Istituto di Informatica e Telematica, http://cnd.iit.cnr.it/andrea/docs/monet11.pdf
                   (current Sep. 22, 2011).

             Avenarius, C.B. (2010) “Starke und schwache Beziehungen” in Stegbauer, C. and R. Häussling (eds.) Handbuch
                   Netzwerkforschung, Wiesbaden, Germany: VS Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften, pp. 99–111.

             Bahr, D.B., R.C. Browning, H.R. Wyatt and J.O. Hill (2009) “Exploiting Social Networks to Mitigate the Obesity
                   Epidemic”, Obesity, (17)4, pp. 723–728.

             Bakshy, E., I. Rosenn, C. Marlow and L. Adamic (2012) “The Role of Social Networks in Information Diffusion” in

                   The Proceedings of ACM WWW 2012, April 16–20, 2012, Lyon, France, Arxiv preprint arXiv:1201.4145, pp.
                   1–17.

             Berkman, L.F., T. Glass, I. Brissette and T.E. Seeman (2000) “From Social Integration to Health: Durkheim in the
                   New Millennium”, Social Science & Medicine, (51)6, pp. 843–857.





              Volume 32                         Article 5
152
Bodendorf, F. and C. Kaiser (2009) “Detecting Opinion Leaders and Trends in Online Social Networks”, Proceedings

      of the 2nd Workshop on Social Web Search and Mining, New York. NY: ACM, pp. 65–68.

Bollen, J., B. Goncalves, G. Ruan and H. Mao (2011) “Happiness Is Assortative in Online Social Networks”, Artificial
      Life, (17)3, pp. 237–251.

Borgatti, S.P., C. Jones and M.G. Everett (1998) “Network Measures of Social Capital”, Connections, (21)2, pp. 27–
      36.

Bos, L., A. Marsh, D. Carroll, S. Gupta and M. Rees (2008) “Patient 2.0 Empowerment” in Arabnia, H.R. and A.
      Marsh (eds.) Proceedings of the 2008 International Conference on Semantic Web & Web Services, Las

      Vegas, NV: CSREA Press, pp. 164–167.

Bourdieu, P. (1986) “The Forms of Capital” in Richardson, J.G. (ed.) Handbook of Theory and Research for the
      Sociology of Education, New York, NY: Greenwood Press, pp. 241–258.

Boyd, D.M. and N.B. Ellison (2007) “Social Network Sites: Definition, History and Scholarship”, Journal of Computer-
      Mediated Communication, (13)1, pp. 10–230.

Brandtzæg, P.B. and O. Nov (2010) “Facebook Use and Social Capital―A Longitudinal Study” in Proceedings of the
      Fifth International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media, Palo Alto, CA: AAAI, pp. 454–457.

Burke, M., C. Marlow and T.M. Lento (2010) “Social Network Activity and Social Well-being” in Proceedings of the

      28th International Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems―CHI ’10, New York, NY: ACM, p.
      1909.

Burke, M., R. Kraut and C. Marlow (2011) “Social Capital on Facebook: Differentiating Uses and Users” in
      Proceedings of the 2011 Annual Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, New York, NY: ACM,
      pp. 571–580.

Burt, R.S. (2001) “Structural Holes versus Network Closure as Social Capital” in Lin, N., K.S. Cook and R.S. Burt

      (eds.) Social Capital: Theory and Research, New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, pp. 31–56.

BVDW     (2010) Social Media Kompass 2010/2011, Düsseldorf, Germany: Fachgruppe Social Media im
      Bundesverband Digitale Wirtschaft (BVDW), e.V.

Christakis, N.A. and J.H. Fowler (2007) “The Spread of Obesity in a Large Social Network over 32 Years”, The New
      England Journal of Medicine, (357)4, pp. 370–379.

Christakis, N.A. and J.H. Fowler (2008) “Quitting in Droves: The Collective Dynamics of Smoking in a Large Social
      Network”, The New England Journal of Medicine, (358)21, pp. 2249–2258.

Cohen-Cole, E. and J.M. Fletcher (2008) “Is Obesity Contagious? Social Networks vs. Environmental Factors in the
      Obesity Epidemic”, Journal of Health Economics, (27)5, pp. 1382–1387.

Coleman, J.S. (1988) “Social Capital in the Creation of Human Capital”, American Journal of Sociology, (94)1, p. 95.

Coleman, J.S. (1994) Foundations of Social Theory, Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press of Harvard University

      Press.

Dahlgren, G. and M. Whitehead (2007) “Policies and Strategies to Promote Social Equity in Health”, Background
      Document to WHO―Strategy Paper for Europe, Stockholm, Sweden: Institutet för Framtidsstudier.

Ellison, N.B., C. Steinfield and C. Lampe (2007) “The Benefits of Facebook ‘Friends’: Social Capital and College
      Students’ Use of Online Social Network Sites”, Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, (12)4, pp.
      1143–1168.

Ellison, N.B., C. Lampe, C. Steinfield AND J. Vitak, (2010) “With a Little Help from My Friends: Social Network Sites

      and Social Capital” in Papacharissi, Z. (ed.) A Networked Self: Identity, Community and Culture on Social
      Network Sites, New York, NY: Routledge, pp. 124–145.

Ellison, N.B., C. Steinfield and C. Lampe (2011) “Connection Strategies: Social Capital Implications of Facebook-
      enabled Communication Practices”, New Media & Society, (13)6, pp. 873–892.

Finkelstein, E.A., J.G. Trogdon, J.W. Cohen and W. Dietz (2009) “Annual Medical Spending Attributable to Obesity:
      Payer- and Service-specific Estimates”, Health Affairs (Project Hope), (28)5, pp. 822–831.

Fowler, J.H. and N.A. Christakis (2008) “Estimating Peer Effects on Health in Social Networks: A Response to

      Cohen-Cole and Fletcher; Trogdon, Nonnemaker, Pais”, Journal of Health Economics, (27)5, pp. 1400–1405.
Gershenson, C. (2011) “Epidemiology and Social Networks”, Sociological Methods, (22)1, pp. 199–200.




                                                                      Volume 32                         Article 5
                                                                                                                           153
             Gilbert, E. and K. Karahalios (2009) “Predicting Tie Strength with Social Media” in Proceedings of the 27th

                   International Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems CHI ’09, New York, NY: ACM, pp. 211–
                   220.

             Granovetter, M.S. (1973) “The Strength of Weak Ties”, The American Journal of Sociology, (78)6, pp. 1360–1380.

             Haines, V.A., J.J. Beggs and J.S. Hurlbert (2011) “Neighborhood Disadvantage, Network Social Capital and
                  Depressive Symptoms”, Journal of Health and Social Behavior, (52)1, pp. 58–73.

             Hatzakis, T., M. Lycett, R.D. Macredie and V.A. Martin (2005) “Towards the Development of a Social Capital
                   Approach to Evaluating Change Management Interventions”, European Journal of Information Systems, (14)1,

                   pp. 60–74.

             Haythornthwaite, C. (2002) “Strong, Weak and Latent Ties and the Impact of New Media”, The Information Society,
                   (18)5, pp. 385–401.

             Hine, C. (2008) “Virtual Ethnography: Modes, Varieties, Affordances” in Fielding, N., R.M. Lee and G. Blank (eds.)
                   The SAGE Handbook of Online Research Methods, London, England: Sage, pp. 257–270.

             Huffman, S.K. (2011) “BMI Changes in Russian Adults: The Role of Lifestyles and Spousal Relationships” in 2011
                   Annual Meeting, July 24–26, 2011, Pittsburgh, PA, Milwaukee, WI: Agricultural and Applied Economics

                   Association.

             Huysman, M. and V. Wulf (2005) “IT to Support Knowledge Sharing in Communities, Towards a Social Capital
                   Analysis”, Journal of Information Technology, (21)1, pp. 40–51.

             Hwang, K.O., A.J. Ottenbacher, A.P. Green, M.R. Cannon-Diehl, O. Richardson, E.V. Bernstam and E.J. Thomas
                   (2010) “Social Support in an Internet Weight Loss Community”, International Journal of Medical Informatics,
                   (79)1, pp. 5–13.

             Hyyppä, M.T. (2010) Healthy Ties, Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer.

             James, P.T., R. Leach, E. Kalamara and M. Shayeghi (2001) “The Worldwide Obesity Epidemic”, Obesity, (9)11S,

                   pp. 228–233.

             Kaiser, C., J. Kröckel and F. Bodendorf (2010) “Ant-based Simulation of Opinion Spreading in Online Social
                   Networks”, Proceedings of the 2010 IEEE/WIC/ACM International Joint Conference on Web Intelligence and
                   Intelligent Agent Technologies, pp. 537–540.

             Kaplan, A.M. and M. Haenlein (2010) “Users of the World, Unite! The Challenges and Opportunities of Social
                   Media”, Business Horizons, (53)1, pp. 59–68.

             Kawachi, I., S.V. Subramanian and D. Kim (2008) “Social Capital and Health―A Decade of Progress and Beyond”
                   in Kawachi, I., S.V. Subramanian and D. Kim (eds.) Social Capital and Health, New York, NY: Springer, pp. 1–

                   26.

             Kim, D., S.V. Subramanian and I. Kawachi (2008) “Social Capital and Physical Health” in Kawachi, I., S.V.
                   Subramanian and D. Kim (eds.) Social Capital and Health, New York, NY: Springer, pp. 139–190.

             Kneidinger, B. (2010) Facebook und Co., Wiesbaden, Germany: VS Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften.

             Lakon, C.M., D.C. Godette and J.R. Hipp (2008) “Network-based Approaches for Measuring Social Capital” in
                   Kawachi, I., S.V. Subramanian and D. Kim (eds.) Social Capital and Health, New York, NY: Springer, pp. 63–
                   81.

             Lewis, K., J. Kaufman, M. Gonzalez, A. Wimmer and N. Christakis (2008) “Tastes, Ties and Time: A New Social

                   Network Dataset Using Facebook.com”, Social Networks, (30)4, pp. 330–342.

             Li, Y., A. Pickles and M. Savage (2005) “Social Capital and Social Trust in Britain”, European Sociological Review,
                   (21)2, pp. 109–123.

             Lin, N. (2001a) “Building a Network Theory of Social Capital” in Lin, N., K.S. Cook AND R.S. Burt (eds.) Social
                   Capital: Theory and Research, New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, pp. 3–29.

             Lin, N. (2001b) Social Capital: A Theory of Social Structure and Action, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
                   Press.

             Lin, N., K.S. Cook and R.S. Burt (2001) Social Capital: Theory and Research. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction

                   Publishers.

             Lindström, M. (2008) “Social Capital and Health-related Behaviors” in Kawachi, I., S.V. Subramanian, D. Kim (eds.)
                   Social Capital and Health, New York, NY: Springer, pp. 215–238.


              Volume 32                         Article 5
154
Ma, X., G. Chen and J. Xiao (2010) “Analysis of an Online Health Social Network” in Proceedings of the 1st ACM

      International Health Informatics Symposium, IHI ’10, New York, NY: ACM, pp. 297–306.

Maloney-Krichmar, D. and J. Preece (2002) “The Meaning of an Online Health Community in the Lives of Its
      Members: Roles, Relationships and Group Dynamics”, 2002 International Symposium on Technology and
      Society ISTAS ’02, pp. 20–27.

Maloney-Krichmar, D. and J. Preece (2005) “A Multilevel Analysis of Sociability, Usability and Community Dynamics
      in an Online Health Community”, ACM Transactions on Computer–Human Interaction, (12)2, pp. 1–32.

Mattila, E., I. Korhonen, J.H. Salminen, A. Ahtinen, E. Koskinen, A. Särelä, J. Pärkkä and R. Lappalainen (2010)

      “Empowering Citizens for Well-being and Chronic Disease Management with Wellness Diary”, IEEE
      Transactions on Information Technology in Biomedicine: A Publication of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine
      and Biology Society, 14(2), pp. 456–463.

McKeen, J.D. and H.A. Smith (2007) “Developments in Practice XXVI: Social Networks: Knowledge Management’s
      ‘Killer App’?”, Communications of the Association for Information Systems, (19) Article 27, pp. 611–621.

McNeill, L.H., M.W. Kreuter and S.V. Subramanian (2006) “Social Environment and Physical Activity: A Review of

      Concepts and Evidence”, Social Science & Medicine, (63)4, pp. 1011–1022.

MedStar Physician Partners/MedStar Family Choice (2007) “Clinical Guidelines on the Identification, Evaluation and
      Treatment of Overweight and Obesity in Adults”, WMJ: Official Publication of the State Medical Society of
      Wisconsin, (97)9.

Moore, S. (2010) “Social Networks, Social Capital and Obesity: A Literature Review” in Dubé, L. (ed.) Obesity
      Prevention, San Diego, CA: Academic Press, pp. 673–685.

Moore, S., M. Daniel, L. Gauvin and L. Dubé (2009a) “Not All Social Capital Is Good Capital”, Health & Place, (15)4,

      pp. 1071–1077.

Moore, S., M. Daniel, C. Paquet, L. Dubé and L. Gauvin (2009b) “Association of Individual Network Social Capital
      with Abdominal Adiposity, Overweight and Obesity”, Journal of Public Health, (31)1, pp. 175–183.

Moore, S., A. Shiell, P. Hawe and V.A. Haines (2005) “The Privileging of Communitarian Ideas: Citation Practices
      and the Translation of Social Capital into Public Health Research”, American Journal of Public Health 95(8),
      pp. 1330–1337.

Munson, S.A. and S. Consolvo (2012) “Exploring Goal-setting, Rewards, Self-monitoring and Sharing to Motivate

      Physical Activity”, 6th International Conference on Pervasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare, San
      Diego, CA.

Nakamura, C., M. Bromberg, S. Bhargava, P. Wicks and Q. Zeng-Treitler (2012) “Mining Online Social Network Data
      for Biomedical Research: A Comparison of Clinicians’ and Patients’ Perceptions About Amyotrophic Lateral
      Sclerosis Treatments”, Journal of Medical Internet Research, (14)3, http://www.jmir.org/2012/3/e90/ (current

      Aug. 31, 2012).

PatientsLikeMe (2012) http://www.patientslikeme.com/ (current Aug. 31, 2012).

Parameswaran, M. and A.B. Whinston (2007) “Social Computing: An Overview”, Communications of the Association
      for Information Systems, (19) Article 37, pp. 762–780.

Pi-Sunyer, F.X. (2002) “The Obesity Epidemic: Pathophysiology and Consequences of Obesity”, Obesity, (10)S12,
      pp. 97S–104S.

Polke-Majewski, K. (2011) “Cameron hat kein digitales Problem, sondern ein soziales”, ZEIT ONLINE, http://
      www.zeit.de/politik/ausland/2011-08/grossbritannien-krawalle-cameron-twitter-facebook-scial-media/

      komplettansicht (current Jan. 15, 2012).
Portes, A. (1998) “Social Capital: Its Origins and Applications in Modern Sociology”, Annual Review of Sociology,

      (24)1, pp. 1–24.

PRI (2005) “Measurement of Social Capital: Reference Document for Public Policy Research, Development and
      Evaluation”, Policy Research Initiative, http://www.horizons.gc.ca/doclib/Measurement_E.pdf (current Sep. 22,
      2011).

Putnam, R.D. (2001) Bowling Alone, New York, NY: Simon & Schuster.

Putnam, R.D., R. Leonardi and R.Y. Nanetti (1994) Making Democracy Work: Civic Traditions in Modern Italy,
      Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.




                                                                       Volume 32                          Article 5
                                                                                                                             155
             Rosenquist, J.N., J. Murabito, J.H. Fowler and N.A. Christakis (2010) “The Spread of Alcohol Consumption Behavior

                   in a Large Social Network”, Annals of Internal Medicine, (152)7, pp. 426–433.

             Rostila, M. (2008) “Healthy Bridges. Studies of Social Capital, Welfare and Health”, Ph.D. Thesis, Stockholm,
                   Sweden: Stockholm University.

             Rostila, M. (2010a) “Birds of a Feather Flock Together―And Fall Ill? Migrant Homophily and Health in Sweden”,
                   Sociology of Health & Illness, (32)3, pp. 382–399.

             Rostila, M. (2010b) “The Facets of Social Capital”, Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour, (41)3, pp. 308–326.

             Rostila, M. (2011) “A Resource-based Theory of Social Capital for Health Research: Can It Help Us Bridge the
                   Individual and Collective Facets of the Concept?”, Social Theory & Health, (9), pp. 1–21.

             Schone, M. (2011) “London Riots: Blame Twitter―Or BlackBerry Messenger?”, ABC News, http://abcnews.go.com/

                   Blotter/london-riots-blame-twitter-blackberry-messenger/story?id=14255618 (current Feb. 25, 2012).

             Shim, J. P., S. Dekleva, and C. Guo (2011) “Twitter, Google, iPhone/iPad, and Facebook (TGIF) and Smart
                   Technology Environments: How Well Do Educators Communicate with Students via TGIF?”, Communications
                   of the Association for Information Systems, (29) Article 35, pp. 657–672.

             Slama, K., C.-Y. Chiang and D.A. Enarson (2007) “Helping Patients to Stop Smoking”, The International Journal of
                   Tuberculosis and Lung Disease, (11)7, pp. 733–738.

             Smith, J. (2010) “December Data on Facebook’s US Growth by Age and Gender: Beyond 100 Million”, Inside

                   Facebook,    http://www.insidefacebook.com/2010/01/04/december-data-on-facebook’s-us-growth-by-age-and-
                   gender-beyond-100-million/ (current Aug. 26, 2011).

             Smith, K.P. and N.A. Christakis (2008) “Social Networks and Health”, Annual Review of Sociology, (34)1, pp. 405–
                   429.

             Smith, M.S. (2008) “Social Capital in Online Communities” in Proceeding of the 2nd PhD Workshop on Information
                   and Knowledge Management―PIKM ’08, New York, NY: ACM, pp. 17–24.

             Smith, M.S. (2009) “Social Capital in Online Communities”, http://m.smithworx.com/publications/proposal2009.pdf

                   (current Sep. 21, 2011).
             Smith, M.S. and C. Giraud-Carrier (2010) “Bonding vs. Bridging Social Capital: A Case Study in Twitter” in 2010

                   IEEE Second International Conference on Social Computing (IEEE), pp. 385–392.

             Smith, M.S., C. Giraud-Carrier and N. Purser (2009) “Implicit Affinity Networks and Social Capital”, Information
                   Technology and Management, (10)2, pp. 123–134.

             Smith, M.S., N. Purser and C. Giraud-Carrier (2008) “Social Capital in the Blogosphere: A Case” in Papers from the
                   AAAI Spring Symposium on Social Information Processing, Chicago, IL: AAAI Press, pp. 93–97.

             Steinfield, C., N.B. Ellison and C. Lampe (2008) “Social Capital, Self-esteem and Use of Online Social Network
                   Sites: A Longitudinal Analysis”, Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, (29)6, pp. 434–445.

             Steinfield, C., J.M. DiMicco, N.B. Ellison and C. Lampe (2009) “Bowling Online: Social Networking and Social

                   Capital Within the Organization”, Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Communities and
                   Technologies, New York, NY: ACM, pp. 245–254.

             Steiny, D.F. (2009) “Networks and Persuasive Messages”, Communications of the Association for Information
                   Systems, (24) Article 27, pp. 473–484.

             Swan, M. (2009) “Emerging Patient-driven Health Care Models: An Examination of Health Social Networks,
                   Consumer Personalized Medicine and Quantified Self-tracking”, International Journal of Environmental

                   Research and Public Health, (6)2, pp. 492–525.

             Swan, M. (2012) “Crowdsourced Health Research Studies: An Important Emerging Complement to Clinical Trials in
                   the Public Health Research Ecosystem”, Journal of Medical Internet Research, (14)2 http://www.jmir.org/
                   2012/2/e46/ (current Aug. 31, 2012).

             Stone, W. and J. Hughes (2002) “Measuring Social Capital: Towards a Standardised Approach” in Proceedings of
                   the Australasian Evaluation Society International Conference October/November 2002, http://www.aes.asn.au/

                   conferences/ (current March 27, 2012).

             Van Den Hooff, B. and M. De Winter (2011) “Us and Them: A Social Capital Perspective on the Relationship
                   Between the Business and IT Departments”, European Journal of Information Systems, (20)3, pp. 255–266.




              Volume 32                         Article 5
156
Vitak, J., N.B. Ellison and C. Steinfield (2011) “The Ties That Bond: Re-examining the Relationship Between

      Facebook Use and Bonding Social Capital” in Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on
      System Sciences, pp. 1–10.

Von Rohr, M. (2011) “Die Revolution, die keine war”, DER SPIEGEL, http://www.spiegel.de/spiegel/0,1518,742430-
      3,00.html (current Feb. 20, 2012).

Wang, Y., M.A. Beydoun, L. Liang, B. Caballero and S.K. Kumanyika (2008) “Will All Americans Become Overweight
      or Obese? Estimating the Progression and Cost of the US Obesity Epidemic”, Obesity, (16)10, pp. 2323–

      2330.

Wasserman, S. and K. Faust (1994) Social Network Analysis: Methods and Applications, Cambridge, UK:
      Cambridge University Press.

Wefing, H. (2012) “Wir! Sind! Wütend!”, DIE ZEIT, (67)10, pp. 3–5.

WHO (2000) “Obesity: Preventing and Managing the Global Epidemic, Report of a WHO Consultation”, World Health
      Organization, WHO Technical Report Series 894.

WHO (2011a) “Obesity and Overweight”, World Health Organization, http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/
      fs311/en/index.html (current July 11, 2011).

WHO (2011b) “10 Facts on Obesity”, World Health Organization, http://www.who.int/features/factfiles/obesity/facts/
      en (current Dec. 15, 2011).

WHO (2012a) “Global Database on Body Mass Index”, World Health Organization, http://apps.who.int/bmi/index.jsp
      (current March 12, 2012).

WHO (2012b) “Controlling the Global Obesity Epidemic”, World Health Organization, http://www.who.int/nutrition/

      topics/obesity/en/ (current Aug. 31, 2012).

Wilson, C., B. Boe, A. Sala, K.P.N. Puttaswamy and B.Y. Zhao (2009) “User Interactions in Social Networks and
      Their Implications”, Proceedings of the Fourth ACM European Conference on Computer Systems―EuroSys
      ’09, New York, NY: ACM, pp. 205–218.

Wilson, E.V. and N.K. Lankton (2004) “Interdisciplinary Research and Publication Opportunities in Information
      Systems and Health Care”, Communications of the Association for Information Systems, (14) Article 17, pp.

      332–343.
Yach, D., D. Stuckler and K.D. Brownell (2006) “Epidemiologic and Economic Consequences of the Global

      Epidemics of Obesity and Diabetes”, Nature Medicine, (12)1, pp. 62–66.

Yoder, C. and F. Stutzman (2011) “Identifying Social Capital in the Facebook Interface”, Proceedings of the 2011
      Annual Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, New York, NY: ACM, pp. 585–588.

Young, K. (2011) “Social Ties, Social Networks and the Facebook Experience”, International Journal of Emerging
      Technologies and Society, (9)1, pp. 20–34.

Zarrella, D. (2010) “Activity on Facebook by Age”, Inbound Internet Marketing Blog, http://blog.hubspot.com/blog/
      tabid/6307/bid/6031/Activity-on-Facebook-by-Age-Infographic.aspx (current Aug. 26, 2011).


ABOUT THE AUTHORS

Carolin Durst is an Associate Professor at the Chair of Information System II at the University of Erlangen-
Nuremberg. She holds a Ph.D. in the field of Services Science and her current research focuses on online social
networks, as well as collaborative decision support in future studies.


Janine Viol is a research assistant and Ph.D. student at the Chair of Information System II at the University of
Erlangen-Nuremberg since October 2011. Her research interests lie in the field of online social networks and
sociotechnical networking between enterprises.


Nilmini Wickramasinghe, who holds the Epworth Chair in Health Information Management and is a professor at
RMIT University, has an internationally recognized research record in the area of healthcare and technology
management. She has over 200 peer-reviewed scholarly publications, over ten books and an encyclopedia.









                                                                      Volume 32                         Article 5
                                                                                                                           157
             Copyright © 2013 by the Association for Information Systems. Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part

             of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for
             profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and full citation on the first page. Copyright for
             components of this work owned by others than the Association for Information Systems must be honored.

             Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists
             requires prior specific permission and/or fee. Request permission to publish from: AIS Administrative Office, P.O.
             Box 2712 Atlanta, GA, 30301-2712, Attn: Reprints; or via e-mail from ais@aisnet.org.








































































              Volume 32                          Article 5
158
 .
                                                                                          ISSN: 1529-3181
                                                    EDITOR-IN-CHIEF
                                                        Matti Rossi

                                                      Aalto University

AIS PUBLICATIONS COMMITTEE
Kalle Lyytinen                            Matti Rossi                              Shirley Gregor
Vice President Publications               Editor, CAIS                             Editor, JAIS
Case Western Reserve University           Aalto University                         The Australian National University
Robert Zmud                               Phillip Ein-Dor                          Bernard Tan
AIS Region 1 Representative               AIS Region 2 Representative              AIS Region 3 Representative

University of Oklahoma                    Tel-Aviv University                      National University of Singapore
CAIS ADVISORY BOARD
Gordon Davis                   Ken Kraemer                    M. Lynne Markus                Richard Mason
University of Minnesota        University of California at    Bentley University             Southern Methodist University
                               Irvine

Jay Nunamaker                  Henk Sol                       Ralph Sprague                  Hugh J. Watson
University of Arizona          University of Groningen        University of Hawaii           University of Georgia
CAIS SENIOR EDITORS
Steve Alter                                                   Michel Avital
University of San Francisco                                   Copenhagen Business School

CAIS EDITORIAL BOARD
Monica Adya                    Dinesh Batra                   Tina Blegind Jensen            Indranil Bose
Marquette University           Florida International University Copenhagen Business School   Indian Institute of Management
                                                                                             Calcutta
Tilo Böhmann                   Thomas Case                    Harvey Enns                    Andrew Gemino

University of Hamburg          Georgia Southern University    University of Dayton           Simon Fraser University
Matt Germonprez                Mary Granger                   Åke Gronlund                   Douglas Havelka
University of Nebraska at      George Washington University University of Umea               Miami University
Omaha
Jonny Holmström                K.D. Joshi                     Michel Kalika                  Karlheinz Kautz

Umeå University                Washington State University    University of Paris Dauphine   Copenhagen Business School
Julie Kendall                  Nelson King                    Hope Koch                      Nancy Lankton
Rutgers University             American University of Beirut  Baylor University              Marshall University
Claudia Loebbecke              Paul Benjamin Lowry            Don McCubbrey                  Fred Niederman
University of Cologne          City University of Hong Kong   University of Denver           St. Louis University

Shan Ling Pan                  Katia Passerini                Jan Recker                     Jackie Rees
National University of         New Jersey Institute of        Queensland University of       Purdue University
Singapore                      Technology                     Technology
Jeremy Rose                    Saonee Sarker                  Raj Sharman                    Mikko Siponen
Aarhus University              Washington State University    State University of New York   University of Oulu
                                                              at Buffalo

Thompson Teo                   Heikki Topi                    Frank Ulbrich                  Chelley Vician
National University of         Bentley University             Newcastle Business School      University of St. Thomas
Singapore
Padmal Vitharana               Rolf Wigand                    Fons Wijnhoven                 Vance Wilson

Syracuse University            University of Arkansas, Little University of Twente           Worcester Polytechnic Institute
                               Rock
Yajiong Xue
East Carolina University

DEPARTMENTS
Information Systems and Healthcare     Information Technology and Systems             Papers in French
Editor: Vance Wilson                   Editors: Dinesh Batra and Andrew Gemino        Editor: Michel Kalika
ADMINISTRATIVE PERSONNEL
James P. Tinsley               Meri Kuikka                    Sheri Hronek                   Copyediting by

AIS Executive Director         CAIS Managing Editor           CAIS Publications Editor       S4Carlisle Publishing Services
                               Aalto University               Hronek Associates, Inc.




                                                                             Volume 32                           Article 5