SOCIAL MEDIA: A COMPREHENSIVE KNOWLEDGE SYNTHESIS AND CASE STUDIES OF


                  APPLICATIONS IN MEDICINE AND HEALTH(CARE)



                                         by



                               Francisco J. Grajales III




           A THESIS FORMATTED SUBMITTED IN PARTIAL FULFILLMENT OF

                     THE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE DEGREE OF




                                MASTER OF SCIENCE



                                         in



                          The Faculty of Graduate Studies



                             (Interdisciplinary Studies)




                      THE UNIVERSITY OF BRITISH COLUMBIA


                                    (Vancouver)



                                     July 2012




                           © Francisco J. Grajales III, 2012





                                                                                     i
ABSTRACT


Social media are dynamic tools that have allowed virtual socialization and dialogue to

emerge on the Internet. Although the term is often used synonymously with social


networking and web 2.0, social media have penetrated intra-personal and professional

communication extensively and their use has become essentially tacit knowledge among


teenagers, and increasingly in the general population. To date, the value of social media


to health professionals as a tool for clinical activity and in public health has not been

extensively studied.


       Blogs, Facebook, Twitter, Wikipedia, YouTube, Flickr, Mashups and Second Life

are no longer obscure words in the vocabularies of highly technical people. These spaces


are starting to replace face-to-face interaction in a large majority of populations and


institutions.

       Healthcare has not been isolated from this trend. The evidence base for the use


of social media is rising exponentially, with applications in medical education,

collaboration, surveillance, clinical trials, public health, and health services research.


However, the comprehensive documentation of how, where and why these tools are

affecting health(care) is not well documented.


       This thesis provides a comprehensive review of the impact of social media in


medicine and health(care). Chapter 1 provides an overview of the conceptual and

theoretical frameworks, along with the assumptions, that guide the use of social media


in the health domain. Chapter 2 synthesizes the what, where, when, how and why social

media are being adopted, structured according to the different functionalities of social




                                                                                       ii
media. These include blogs, microblogs, social networking, professional and thematic

networking, wikis, media sharing tools, mashups, collaborative filtering/bookmarking


and other social media (e.g., Second Life). Chapter 2 also discusses a series of clinical


implications and recommendations for stakeholders wishing to engage these dynamic

spaces. Chapter 3 reviews three recent administrative and judicial cases that have


emerged from the inappropriate use of social media and Chapter 4 concludes with the


main implications of and significance of the findings. Further research is clearly required

to solidify the evidence on the use of social media in health care and to explore and


document its economic, clinical, governance and tactical impact and utility.






































                                                                                            iii
PREFACE

The third case study in Chapter 3 was published by Francisco J. Grajales III as a letter
entitled One Step Forward, Two Steps Back: Why Can’t We Protect Doctors Who Put

Patients First? This work can be found in the Journal of Participatory Medicine under the
Creative Commons Public License. It has also been archived and curated at
http://www.jopm.org/opinion/letters/2011/08/08/one-step-forward-two-steps-back-
why-can%E2%80%99t-we-protect-doctors-who-put-patients-first/















































                                                                               iv
                    TABLE OF CONTENTS


ABSTRACT…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….. i
PREFACE………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………. iv

TABLE OF CONTENTS………………………………………………………………………………………………………v
LIST OF TABLES…………………………………………………..………………………………………………………... vi

LIST OF FIGURES……………………………………………………..…………………………………………………...vii
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS………….…………………………………………………………………………………….viii

DEDICATION…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………..ix
CHAPTER 1: A Review of the Foundations for this Research

     Introduction………………………………………………………………………………………………………. 1
     Conceptual Frameworks……………………………………………………………………………………. 3
     Theoretical Frameworks………………………………………………………………………………….. 12

     Objectives…………………………………………………………………………………………………………17
CHAPTER 2: A Review of the Where, How, and Why Social Media are Being Used

     Introduction……………………………………………………………………………………………………..18
     Method…………………………………………………………………………………………………………….19

     Results………………………………………………………………………………………………………………25
     Discussion…………………………………………………………………………………………………………61

     Clinical Implications………………………………………………………………………………………….71
     Conclusion………………………………………………………………………………………………………..73

CHAPTER 3: A Selection of Recent Judicial and Administrative Case Studies
     Introduction……………………………………………………………………………………………………..75

     Case Study 1……………………………………………………………………………………………………..76
     Case Study 2……………………………………………………………………………………………………..77

     Case Study 3……………………………………………………………………………………………………..79
     Discussion…………………………………………………………………………………………………………80

     Conclusion………………………………………………………………………………………………………..87
CHAPTER 4: Conclusions

     What We Know…………………………………………………………………………………………………88
     What We Would Like to Know………………………………………………………………………….90

REFERENCES…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………92












                                                               v
                                      LIST OF TABLES


Table 2.1: MEDLINE Search String.....................................................................................23
Table 2.2: Categorical Definitions of Social Media............................................................24

Table 2.3: MedGadget Top Medical Blogs for 2010..........................................................29
Table 2.4: A Selection of Common Twitter Terminology..................................................31

Table 2.5: 140 Healthcare Uses for Twitter (Synthesized)................................................33
Table 2.6: 61 Medical Wikis..............................................................................................46

Table 2.7: Some Well Known Health-related Mashups....................................................50

Table 2.8: Types and Descriptions of Different Media Sharing Sites................................55
Table 2.9: A Summary of Health Related Spaces in Second Life.......................................61

Table 3.1: Royal College of Physicians of BC Position on Social Media.............................84
Table 3.2: Excerpts from the CMA’s Rules of Engagement with Social Media.................85






































                                                                                                      vi
                                   LIST OF FIGURES


Figure 1.1: The Evolution of Media…………………………………………………………………………………2
Figure 1.2: The Spectrum of Medical Informatics...............................................................4

Figure 1.3: Understanding Network Effects…………………………………………………………………….5
Figure 1.4: Worldwide Mobile Broadband Subscriptions...................................................6

Figure 1.5: Worldwide Fixed Broadband Subscriptions......................................................6
Figure 1.6: Understanding the Chasm..............................................................................11

Figure 1.7: Number of Articles Published in PubMed Related to Social Media................16
Figure 2.1: A Sample Rounding Blogging Case..................................................................28

Figure 2.2: The HealthSeeker Diabetes Education App on Facebook...............................41

Figure 2.3: A Public Profile on LinkedIn............................................................................43
Figure 2.4: CureTogether’s Page on Chronic Fatigue Syndrome...................................... 45

Figure 2.5: North American Outbreaks in the HealthMap Mashup..................................51
Figure 2.6: An Avatar Inside a Virtual Operating Room in Second Life.............................58

Figure 3.1: Doyle Byrnes’ Facebook Picture......................................................................78


































                                                                                                vii
                          ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS


The completion of this work took me around the world to places I had never seen nor
dreamed of ever visiting in my life. In social media I found new friends, colleagues, and
most importantly, mentors.


First and foremost, I would like to thank my parents and family for their unconditional
love and support, to my crazy ideas every step of the way, despite having to miss

birthdays, family dinners, and funerals.

To my supervisors Drs. Kendall Ho, Sam Sheps, Helen Novak Lauscher, and Mr. Dean

Giustini; I thank them for their patience and for opening a world that I had never seen.
They expanded my intellectual horizons to a level I could only have aspired to reach.

To my internship and WRTC field placement supervisors: Drs. Joan Dzenowagis and

Veronique Thouvenot (World Health Organization) and Ms. Elizabeth Ashbourne (the
World Bank Group), who taught me the infinite facets of eHealth and Health Services
Research as they apply in human development, I am grateful for the opportunity they

gave me to learn and apply my new knowledge at the tactical level.

To my closest friends, colleagues, and mentors who picked up the phone or Skype,
smiled, encouraged me, and helped me keep my mental sanity through it all (affiliations

in brackets for those outside of UBC): Sal Abbott (Rotary International), Mohammed
Abdel-Fattah, Alma Barranco-Mendoza (Trinity Western University), Michael Bodner
(Trinity Western University), Ralph Brands, Kevin Clauson (Nova Southwestern

University), Lucien Engelen (UMC Radboud), Luis Fernandez Luque (Northern Research
Institute), Imma Grau (Hospital Clínic de Barcelona), Misha Kay (WHO), Darlene Kent
(Royal Canadian Mounted Police), Peter Kwok (Canadian Forces), Alex Jadad (University

of Toronto), Isabella Losinger, Bertalan Mesko (Webicina), Peter Murray (International
Medial Informatics Association), Carlos Rizo (eHealth in Motion), Lucia Ruggiero
(PAHO/WHO), and Hussain Virani (Hybrid Systems), I am grateful for your friendship.


To my tweeps who planted a seed, which became my passion for using social media to
improve health and wellness, I am grateful for your information and caring nuggets that
always fit in 140 characters.


Finally, I am grateful to the eHealth Strategy Office (Dr. Kendall Ho) and the Western
Regional Training Centre for Health Services Research (Dr. Sam Sheps) for their financial
support, which were provided for the completion of this work.









                                                                                    viii
To those who never had the opportunity




















































                                                ix
CHAPTER 1


                  Social Media in Medicine and Health(care):


                A Review of the Foundations for this Research


                                   INTRODUCTION

What is social media and web 2.0? Why has the use of social media become nearly


ubiquitous in contemporary society so quickly? What theoretical and conceptual


frameworks guide the use of social media in medicine and health(care)? What gaps exist

in our knowledge regarding the use of social media? This chapter will address important


questions for clinicians, researchers, and decision-makers who are trying to make sense

of the evolution and adoption of social technologies. In particular, this chapter will


review the history of social media, and their conceptual and theoretical frameworks.

The History of Social Media


       Humans are social entities who have found innovative ways to communicate

                                                       1
with one another throughout history. Although orality    has been and will remain a

primary form of communication, socialization in the graphic form dates back to


prehistoric times - in the form of cave drawings. With new technologies, new social, and

socialization media emerged, such as stele and papyri. [1] Later, with the immense work


of monks in scriptoria and other elites all over the world, albeit in arcane languages that


only a relatively few in the general population could understand, this trend continued.

[2] Then came the Gutenberg Revolution, which allowed books and news in the form of



1Orality is thought and verbal expression in societies where the technologies of literacy
(especially writing and print) are unfamiliar to most of the population. [3]



                                                                                    1
print/texts in the vernacular to reach the masses and several centuries later the

electronic age (first with the telephone and telegraph, an early form of tweets),


followed shortly by television as a form of mass communication and computers as a


form of mass participation and recursively to smart phones as multimedia instruments

of mass communication and participation. [1]


       With the dawn of the Internet, a new information and communication revolution


occurred. The near ubiquitous access to information and communication technologies

(ICT), and later on, mobile forms of ICTs led to the adoption of social media as we know


it today (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, and Wikipedia). This evolution has been well


documented in media studies; most notably by Herbert Marshall McLuhan in 1964 in

the book Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man. [4] Figure 1.1 summarizes the


technological evolution of media. [4]


                             Figure 1.1: The Evolution of Media



























                                                                                      2
                                                            2
                          CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORKS


Social Media and Web 2.0

       Today, social media are a vehicle for “social interaction, using highly accessible,


and scalable, communication techniques. The term refers to the use of web-based and


mobile technologies to turn communication into interactive dialogue”. [5] These include

a spectrum of digital content including, but not limited to: videos, images, print-based


materials, status updates, websites, and hyperlinks to other types of media. Social


media, often semantically linked with web 2.0, is a term used by industry in the Silicon

Valley (California, USA) to denote the new Web of the early 2000s, the key feature of


which is that high levels of technical skill were no longer required to make new


websites. Today, some of the most prolific social media websites include: Facebook,

Twitter, YouTube, Second Life, Wikipedia, LinkedIn, Flickr, FourSquare, among many


others.


       In medicine, social media have been used for massive collaboration (e.g., the

Type II Diabetes page on Wikipedia was written by more than 800 contributors [6], to


catalyze the speed of information exchange (e.g., a tweet-like update sent by the World


Health Organization reaches over 400 000 followers [7], for medical education (e.g., the

Clinical Cases and Images Blog hosts virtual rounding cases [8]), among others.


Conceptually, social media lie at the nexus of information age healthcare and industrial


age medicine because they encompass a branch of medical informatics with a broad



2
  Conceptual frameworks outline the tenets and assumptions of research as it is
operationalized within a broader context.


                                                                                      3
range of applications from bench-side research, to peer-to-peer support, to clinical

medicine. These concepts are illustrated on Figure 1: The Spectrum of Medical


Informatics. [9]

                  Figure 1.2: The Spectrum of Medical Informatics [9]
















Contemporary Society and Social Media

       The evolution of technology over the last fifty years can be characterized by two


trends, which are exemplified by Moore’s and Metcalfe’s “Laws” (see below),


respectively. These may be used to understand the exponential adoption of innovations,

including social media.


       In 1965, Gordon Moore, the co-founder of Intel Corporation observed that the


number of transistors in computers were doubling every year. [10] Simply put, this

meant that, due to a doubling of processing power, a laptop bought in 1996 was twice


as fast as one bought in 1995. Roughly illustrated, this means that the GameBoy (a


handheld game released in 1989 by Japan’s Nintendo Corporation [11]) has more

processing power than the computers that took man to the moon (these were housed in


air conditioned warehouses with an area of several hundred square feet). Thus,


computers have become so cheap (and powerful) that lower and middle-income



                                                                                    4
households have access to one, at the very least, along with a mobile phone device,

which is, in effect, a dramatic democratization of computing power.


       The second law illustrates a rough empirical description of the power of


networks. In essence, Metcalf’s Law states that the number of cross-connections (e.g.,

connectivity) between actors in a network grows in near exponential fashion whenever


new users are added to a network (see Figure 1.3). Similarly, the value of the network


grows when new users are added; however the notion of value is not articulated by

Metcalfe and the mathematical expression of the law is highly debated, a concept which


has been highly discussed in academic discourses. [12-14]


                        Figure 1.3: Understanding Network Effects [12]




















       These two laws, when combined, explain the exponential adoption of broadband

Internet subscriptions, in both mobile and fixed (e.g., desktop-computer) forms, are the


reason why social media have been adopted to a near ubiquity among the general


population. These trends are best seen through the International Telecommunications






                                                                                      5
      3
Union (ITU) connectivity data, which can be found on Figures 1.4 and 1.5 (units are per


100 inhabitants for the 2000 to 2010 calendar years). [15] Further extrapolated into

Canadian terms, research shows that 26.2 Million Canadians have access to the Internet


(World Bank Development Indicators, 2010) [16] and 79% of these use social media at


least once a month. [17]


                Figure 1.4: Worldwide Mobile Broadband Subscriptions













                  Figure 1.5: Worldwide Fixed Broadband Subscriptions















Functionalities of Social Media


        The expansion in connectivity over the last decade has also resulted in social

media evolving to acquire a number of functionalities and although various classification


schemes exist for categorizing the spectrum of social media tools; the most pragmatic


way to stratify them is based on their initially intended function. Thus, for the purposes

3
  The ITU is the United Nations agency responsible for governance and coordination of
global telecommunication services.


                                                                                           6
of this thesis, social media will be categorized using the International Medical

Informatics Association (IMIA) Social Media Working Group (SMWG) classification [18],


using eleven categories: 1) Social Networking (e.g., Facebook, MySpace); 2) Professional


Networking (e.g., Linked In); 3) Microblogs (e.g., Twitter, Identi); 4) Video Sharing (e.g.,

YouTube, Vimeo); 5) Blogs (e.g., Wordpress, Tumbler, Blogger); 6) Wikis (e.g., Wikipedia,


Wikigenetics, Wikicancer); 7) Forums/Listservs (e.g., Equidad); 8) Photo Sharing (e.g.,


Flickr, Picassa); 9) Thematic networks (e.g., Sermo, Osmosis); 10) Collaborative filtering


(e.g., RSS, Delicious, Mashups); and 11) Other (e.g., MUVE, Aggregators, Wolfram

Alpha).


Important Premises About Social Media in the Medical and Health(care) Domains


        Given the above, there are four caveats which define the operational context in


which this research and medical/health(care) practitioners use social media. They are


important, despite being general observations from the field (not just the clinical world),

because they illustrate the fluidity of the environments in which of social media is used


that may require special considerations (e.g., privacy) and are not necessarily an issue in


broader contemporary contexts.


        First, there is a significant vacuum of evidence regarding the use of social media

in all spectrums of healthcare - from the bedside to the decision-maker level. However


the digital interactions that occur through social media are, by and large, analogous to


telephone/video-based telemedicine. However, one does not necessarily need to



4
  IMIA is the global association of national medical informatics associations with a Non-
Governmental Organization seat at the World Health Organization.


                                                                                          7
perform a triple blind, randomized controlled trial (RCT) to understand that picking up

the phone and asking the most readily-available subject expert, for advice, on the


possible treatment options for a patient will result in a beneficial patient outcome. At


the end of the day, the attending clinician will be responsible for his/her patient, and

must make a decision based on their evaluation of the disease and what they know


about effective treatments. Social media thus provide a new manifestation, similar to


the telephone, that must be evaluated both empirically and qualitatively, but waiting

out for “gold standard” level evidence may be problematic given the rapid speed with


which social media are being adopted.


       Second, there are no “traditional experts” in the use of social media as its

applications are highly contextualized and the rate of change in tool functionality and


prominence varies tremendously and rapidly. A pediatrician, for example, may blog


often and have thousands of followers on their blog; however that does not mean, that

s/he understands the risks of blogging anonymously, or how a virtual community of


patients that use YouTube for peer-to-peer support operates. [19] Indeed, erroneously


people often confuse the number of readers and views in social media with expertise,

which are not necessarily analogous.


       Third, no single semantic categorical definition can be applied to a social media


tool or service due to the diversity of ways in which social media may be used, applied

and interpreted. This tendency is a product of the interconnectivity between services


through the use of APIs or Application Programming Interfaces, which allow social


media services to interconnect with each other, expand their functionality, and reach an



                                                                                       8
exponential number of users. (Think, for example, of asking the question: what is iTunes

best for? The answer to this question will vary on whether the user buys music, rents


movies, buys apps, downloads lectures, listens to the radio or podcasts, or watches TV


shows.) Notwithstanding, it is a fact that functionalities in the social media domain often

merge and change (e.g., When Facebook added its location functionality to compete


with FourSquare, did it become a thematic social network based on the location where

                                                                       5
information was shared? Or; did it remain a social networking site?).


        Finally, social media have the potential for viral adoption and reach. This is why

the rate of growth for Twitter users in early 2009 exceeded 1,334 percent [20], a figure


that would be an anomaly in other media. Similarly, this is also what allows a person or


an organization to be in contact (and interact) with millions of people despite being one

or many degrees of physical separation apart, on instant basis (e.g., think of a


broadcaster asking questions through Twitter to its viewers during an interview with Dr.


Phil - millions may be watching passively, but Twitter feeds allows the connectivity and

interaction that passive watching does not, even with call-in shows or email questions).


Conditions Influencing the Use of Social Media


        When users of social media interact with each other they subject themselves and


their organizations to four conditions - either consciously or subconsciously. These are

described below and are inherent in a number of theories, including: Social Network


Analysis Theory, Rogers Diffusion of Innovations, Economic Theory, and the Theory of


Risk Perception.



5The explanations of these concepts are further expanded upon in Chapter 2.


                                                                                           9
       First, Social Network Analysis Theory [21] suggests that, when social media are

used to find or disseminate information, the information can reach a finite number of


people, and this number will be determined by: 1) the size of an individuals’ social


network (e.g., the number of friends they have on Facebook); 2) the number of

connections that those users have with other users (e.g., how many friends those


friends have); and 3) the location of those users on social and organizational strata. For


example, if a student meets Bill Gates at a conference and Bill follows the student back

on Twitter then the student is more likely to impact more people or find the information


s/he is looking for because Bill Gates may re-tweet the question or other people may


follow the student simply because bill gates is following him thereby increasing reach..

       Second, users adopt social media at a rate that follows the normal distribution


[22] and the area under the curve, that is, the different types of users who use social


media, can be understood through Rogers’ Diffusions of Innovations. [23] Nevertheless,

there is a chasm between two general types of users: 1) those who favor technology and


performance; and, 2) those that prefer solutions and convenience. The first of this group


(the left of the curve) is composed of innovators, technology enthusiasts, early adopters

and visionaries, while the second (the right of the curve) is composed of pragmatists,


conservatives, laggards and skeptics. This is illustrated in Figure 1.6: Understanding the


Chasm. [24]











                                                                                       10
                  Figure 1.6: Understanding the Chasm [24]

















        Third, Economic Theory denotes that all behavior is guided by incentives; that is,


any action on behalf of a person can be due to a naturalistic (e.g., curiosity), moral (e.g.,


a calling to do the right thing), economic (e.g., financial remuneration), or social (e.g., to

connect with others) incentive. [25] Thus, a health provider may answer a patient


request on Facebook or Twitter for a variety of reasons beyond financial remuneration;


it can be because s/he is getting paid to do it, because it can help them build social

capital, or because they may feel it's the right thing to do.


        Finally, there is a formal or informal risk mitigation strategy, or the user/clinician


is unconcerned (or ignorant) of the risk of using social media in a medical or health(care)

context. Examples that denote some of the case law on this issue are discussed in


Chapter 3, including the case of a world renowned blogger and pediatrician, Dr. Flea,


who used anonymity to rant about a personal malpractice lawsuit and ended up having

to pay a large settlement due to his lack of due diligence in his blog posts. [26]









                                                                                         11
                                                            6
                          THEORETICAL FRAMEWORKS


Positivism

       There are two primary philosophies of science that are used in medicine. These


guide the validity, robustness, and appropriateness of measurement in research.


Generally, the majority of medical interventions are evaluated using positivistic

paradigms, which assume “an external [knowable] reality which can be measured; that


phenomena such as ‘project goals’, ‘outcomes’ and ‘formative feedback’ can be


precisely and unambiguously defined, that facts and values are clearly indistinguishable,

and that generalizable statements about the relationship between input and output


variables are possible, [regardless of the context]” [27]. Indeed, this is the mindset of


the gold standard, the RCT, which measures the effect of an intervention on a small,

often, homogenous sample and later on tries to extrapolate its results to a large, often,


heterogeneous population.


       In this research, the positivistic approach is not appropriate to synthesize the

evidence on the use of social media as I am not trying to measure, prove, or generalize


what social media are within the context of medicine and health(care). Rather, my


intent is to question why social media are being used; to uncover and explain what tools

are being used and for which purposes; as well as to understand how different actors


may use and enable change through the use of social media.






6
  Theoretical frameworks outline the theories where this research is situated in the
academic literature.


                                                                                     12
The Critical-Interpretivist Approach

       Thus, this research will use narrative reviews to synthesize and reflect on the


dialogue that has emerged around the use of social media in medicine and health(care).


Methodologically, the critical-interpretivist approach will be used, which uses the

context and conflicts that have emerged within the peer review literature and


traditional and social media to critically appraise and interpret, from a variety of


perspectives, the impact social media are having within the health sector, its workers,

and institutions. As a method, the critical-interpretivist approach assumes that all


research is perspectival (e.g., that it follows a particular person’s point of view) and that


complex social phenomena, such as the adoption of social media tools, are open to

multiple interpretations and, as a consequence, the findings of this research are likely to


be challenged based on the perspective of the person reading and appraising this


research, which further continues the dialogue and therefore compliments the research.

[27]


Medicine 2.0


       In December of 2006, Giustini published the first editorial describing the impact

of web 2.0 on medicine. The publicity surrounding this trend continued in the following


months and was finally conceptualized as a theoretical framework in 2008 by Dr.


Gunther Eysenbach. This is framework [28], which is now recognized as Medicine 2.0,

identifies five emerging and recurrent themes that have affected medicine and


health(care), from the bench to the bedside, and it also takes into account how


clinicians and patients look for, and access, information on the social web; these themes



                                                                                     13
are: 1) Social Networking; 2) Participation; 3) Apomediation; 4) Collaboration; and 5)

Openness. [28]


Social Networking denotes the use of social tools, like YouTube, which allow anyone


with basic computer skills to upload digital media (a video in this case) and commence a

discussion with multiple users through a comments’ feature. Participation allows


multiple user interaction (e.g., a wall posting on Facebook), which connects the author


of the initial post with others interested in the information posted. Apomediation, is a

middle ground for information access; it is a categorical term which lies between


mediation and disintermediation (the removal of mid-level actors) and can be defined as


a state where credible information is not delivered to a consumer through traditional

sources (like the Encyclopedia Britannica). Rather, someone who looks for information


through apomediation uses less traditional pathways and sources (e.g., rather than


looking up a traditional encyclopedia, a user may ask their social capital or virtual friends

for help and advice). [28] Collaboration is the opportunity for very large numbers of


users to work towards a common goal (e.g., the population of content in Wikipedia).


Finally, Openness, which stands for the transparency, interoperability (through the

aforementioned use of APIs), and the general trend for the masses to “open up” private


data, and knowledge, for the benefit of the general population.


 Ongoing Research Questions

       A number of studies have evaluated various facets of social media’s impact to


medicine and health(care). These are thematically centred on public health and health


services research, virtual communities, medical education, information quality, and



                                                                                      14
ethics. Some of the research questions that have been explored, under these categories,

can be found below:


       Public Health and Health Services Research: How do social media users respond


to public health catastrophes (e.g., H1N1)? [29] How can Twitter be used in an

emergency department to improve human and bed resource flow? [30] What is the best


way to recruit clinical trial participants using social media? [31]


       Virtual Communities: What elements determine the development, growth, and

transformation of a virtual community? [32] What incentives drive clinicians to socialize


in a virtual environment? [33] What influence does a virtual Community of Practice have


on medical practices? [34]

       Medical Practice, Education, and Collaboration: How can social media support


the practice of clinical pathology? [35] How can different social media tools improve


medical education? [36] How do residents use Wikipedia and Google in their practice?

[37] What is the best array of social media for virtual collaboration and clinical decision-


making? [38]


       Information delivery and quality: What is the accuracy of drug information on

Wikipedia? [39] How do health information consumers appraise online information


resources? [40] What design elements attract or repel web visitors to a web page? [41]


       Governance and Ethics: What sorts of privacy and confidentiality violations do

residents and medical students portray in their Facebook profiles? [42] How should web


information be safeguarded online and by whom? [43] How should online pharmacies


be regulated? [44]



                                                                                      15
The Need for a Collective Synthesis

       Since 2005, the number of articles published in PubMed on social media has


doubled every year (Figure 1.7) and the diversity of research themes on the use of social


media in medicine and health(care) is likely to continue expanding at an exponential

rate. [45] Although a large number of editorials and scientific studies which identify


changes in the landscape have been published over the last seven years, to date, there


has been no single comprehensive synthesis of the evidence, or lack thereof, for or

against using social media in medicine and health(care).





     Figure 1.7: Number of Articles Published in PubMed Related to Social Media



































                                                                                      16
                              OBJECTIVES OF THIS THESIS

    Given the several set of issues, assumptions and applications of social media noted


above, health services researchers, clinicians, and other medicine and health(care)


stakeholders would benefit from an evidence synthesis, which is the overarching

objective of this thesis. More specifically, using a mixed methods approach, this


research will synthesize:


    1. The contexts – the where, how and why – in which social media has been used in

        medicine and health(care) by different actors, including: (but not limited to)


        clinicians, managers, and health organizations;


    2. Recommendations on how social media may be used appropriately, safely, and

        ethically; and


    3. Prominent legal and ethical dilemmas that have emerged from the adoption of


        social media in medicine and health(care) contexts;

    4. The trends and key issues that must be evaluated in the coming years.

























                                                                                      17
CHAPTER 2


  Veni, Vini, Tweeti: A Review of the Where, How, and Why Social Media


                   are Being Used Medicine & Health(care)


                                 INTRODUCTION

In the previous chapter, I reviewed the history of social media and the conceptual and


theoretical frameworks that are being used to guide this research. In this chapter, I

tackle the second and third objectives of this thesis: to critically review the context in

which social media are used; and to provide recommendations for their safe and ethical


use.

       Social media are web-based tools that are used for computer-mediated


communication. In healthcare, they have been used to improve and maintain peer-to-

peer and clinician-to-patient communication, as well as to promote institutional


branding, and to improve the speed of interaction between and across different

healthcare actors. More specifically (and to name a few applications), they have also


been used to educate clinicians and patients [46], to generate content rich resources

(e.g., Wikipedia) [47]; to evaluate real-time flu trends [48]; to catalyze outreach for


(public) health campaigns [49]; and to recruit patients in clinical trials. [50]

       A number of indicators also suggest that the evidence for using social media in


healthcare is growing; for example: the number of articles indexed on PubMed has

nearly doubled each year for the last four years [45]; social media policies are being


adopted [51] and tested in various healthcare settings [52]; subspecialty-based journals




                                                                              18
are continuously revealing how social media facilitate knowledge-sharing and

collaboration within medical specialties [53]; and theories on the social changes


resulting from their adoption are being developed. [18]


       Despite these increasingly useful insights however, our collective understanding

of how social media can be used in different medical and healthcare contexts has not


been synthesized into a single document.


Objective

I conducted a narrative review to gain a better understanding of how social media are


being used in healthcare. Using a mixed methods approach, I illustrate the where, how,


and why social media are being used. Ultimately, the intent of this review is to allow

different healthcare actors the opportunity to see, understand, and make informed


decisions, on how to use social media and similar electronic-mediated communication


tools as part of their daily activities.

                                      METHOD


       A research question may be evaluated using a number of methods and


traditions. Most commonly, these are grounded on a philosophy of science, which

outline the conceptual and theoretical frameworks of the research, ultimately providing


a lens and a method of inquiry to shape the results presented.


Positivism

       In medicine and healthcare the gold standard review method follows positivistic


epistemology, which assumes that “there is an external reality that can be objectively


measured; that phenomena such as ‘‘project goals’’, ‘‘outcomes’’, and ‘‘formative



                                                                                   19
feedback’’ can be precisely and unambiguously defined; that facts and values are clearly

distinguishable; and that generalizable statements about the relationship between input


and output variables are possible.” [27]


       In the positivistic tradition, reviews are operationalized using robust

methodologies often with a peer review procedure at key steps in the research process.


Cochrane Reviews and some meta-analyses primarily use this approach, where even the


titles and protocols are published in advance of results. Meta-analyses, Cochrane, and

systematic reviews are resource-intensive and follow standardized procedures, which


have been developed by physicians, knowledge management experts, archivists, and


curators. [54] Their procedures/protocols span from the formatting of a title, to the

parameters of a research question (e.g., PICOS - Population, Intervention, Control,


Outcome, and Secondary gains), to specific consortia for reporting results (e.g., the


Checklist for Reporting Results of Internet E-Surveys).

       A number of other review methods also stem from positivism. These include the


Realist Review [55], which is used in evaluation research for the design and


implementation of complex social interventions; the Rapid Review [56], which is an

adaptation of Systematic Reviews and is executed when there is an urgent need for


evidence, such as during public health crises (e.g., during the H1N1 avian flu epidemic);


Scoping Reviews [57], which aim to map the breadth and depth of the peer review

literature within a field; and Narrative Reviews [54], which are most commonly written


by field experts and are usually based on evidence and personal experiential knowledge.






                                                                                     20
An Alternative to Positivism

       Although positivism is the most commonly used epistemological lens in


healthcare, it is not the most appropriate for many topics, including eHealth , where


computer-mediated communication tools like social media are situated. The reasons for

this have been extensively documented by Greenhalgh and Russell’s [27] Why do


evaluations of eHealth programs fail? They can be summarized in four premises. First,


eHealth programs most often have multiple goals, which are perceived differently by


different actors (e.g., the goal of Electronic Medical Records as seen by health

administrators vs. clinicians); thus no single set of goals can serve as a fixed reference


for comparison between inputs and end results. Second, outcomes are not stable; they


change in different contexts and evolve over time (e.g., a hospital may start a Facebook

page, but users may use it for a different purpose than the hospital originally intended).


Third, the link between processes and outcomes in eHealth are typically interrupted by


many variables and confounders; therefore generalizing “success” to a single number of

variables is unreliable. Fourth, program success may not necessarily be articulated in a


vocabulary of outcomes that can be reliably measured (e.g., think of measuring the


governance of different social media tools across different actors, such as a hospital, the


Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons, and a health region). It is important to note

that these recommendations resulted from the evaluation of the UK’s National Health


Service £12.7 billion Connected for Health Initiative, which sought to modernize public-


healthcare services with state-of-the-art information technology using eHealth.

7
   The WHO defines eHealth as application of information and communication
technologies for health and healthcare. [59]


                                                                                       21
       This review follows Greenhalgh’s conceptual recommendations, collectively

known as the critical-interpretivist approach [27]. First, the critical-interpretivist


approach is an interpretative model that assumes a socially constructed reality


acknowledging that people perceive issues in different ways and assign different values

(and significance) to facts or events. Thereby, “reality” is assumed to be unknowable


both objectively and unproblematically because the research process cannot be isolated


from the identity and values of the researcher or subject (they are both inevitably

implicated). Second, the critical-interpretivist approach also assumes that critical


questioning can generate new, and different, knowledge that cannot be generated using


a Positivistic (hypothetico-deductive approach).

Mixed Methods


       This review will draw upon the critical-interpretivist approach not with an intent


to measure, quantify, or generalize its results, but with the intent to illustrate, explain,

and provide the contextual knowledge of why social media are being used in medicine


and health(care). Ultimately, it will allow decision makers and clinicians alike to decide


for themselves where, how and why they may use and implement these computer-

mediated communication tools in their work and (potentially) their personal lives too.


Data Sources and Knowledge Synthesis


       This non-exhaustive review [9] used a number of traditional and non-traditional

reference sources. It is non-exhaustive due to inherent limitations that occur when


trying to assess the medical and health-related grey literature, which is situated within


social media itself; that is, it would be impossible to keep track of new posts and



                                                                                     22
updates on Facebook and Twitter-like tools, as they occur in the thousands every

minute, of every day. Medline was searched using the search string in Table 2.1.


Additionally, data from the Cochrane list of web 2.0 resources, the Health Librarianship


Canada (HLCanada) Wiki, the Pan-American Health Organization’s Equity and Human

Development Listserv, the 2008-2011 proceedings of the International World Congress


on Social Media and Web 2.0 in Health, Medicine and Biomedical Research, and award


winning blogs (e.g., Scienceroll.com) were used to supplement peer-reviewed resources.

Where necessary, results were further supplemented with an environmental scan of the


Google and Bing search engines.


Table 2.1: MEDLINE search string (modified from [45])
("second life" AND (virtual OR 3d OR immersive)) OR "virtual worlds" OR "web 3.0" OR
"medicine 2.0" OR "health 2.0" OR "web 2.0" OR mashup OR "social media" OR digg OR

"del.icio.us" OR "social bookmarking" OR wikis OR folksonomy OR wikipedia OR flickr OR
twitter OR youtube OR facebook OR myspace OR Linkedin OR FourSquare


       Results were categorized based on social media service type (see definition

below) and, where appropriate, further sub-grouped using the United Nations


Foundation Mobile Health for Development Framework [59] which has been used by a


number of high-level actors (e.g., the WHO) to stratify digital media. The categories of

this framework are: 1) education and awareness; 2) data collection; 3) remote


monitoring; 4) peer-to-peer communication amongst healthcare workers; 5) disease and


epidemic outbreak tracking; and 6) diagnostic treatment and support.

Definitions


       As of May 2012, there was no commonly accepted standard to stratify social


media into categories. Thus, in Table 2.2, I expand the functionality strata presented in



                                                                                     23
Chapter 1 to assign a definition to each social media service type. Examples of the

service types are also provided.


Table 2.2 Categorical Definitions of Social Media
Service Type                         Definition                             Example


    Blog       Short for ‘web log’ – a blog is a free, easy-to-publish    WordPress,
               website where bloggers (authors of blogs) post               Blogger

               information and essays in sequential order. [60]
 Microblog     A tiny blog service that allows networks of users to send Twitter, Identi
               short updates to each other in less than 140 characters.

               Microblogs are considered a platform for information
               dissemination,   social  networking,    and   real-time
               communication. [60]

   Social      A social networking site is an online service, platform, or Facebook,
 Networking    site that focuses on building and visualizing social        MySpace
    Site       networks or social relations among people, who, for

               example, share interests and/or activities. A social
               network service essentially consists of a representation
               of each user (often a profile), his/her social links, and a

               variety of additional services. [61]
Professional   A professional networking site is a type of social          LinkedIn,

 Networking    network service that is focused solely on interactions       Sermo,
    Site       and relationships related to business or a person’s         Asklepios,
               professional career. [62]                                    Ozmosis,
                                                                          Drs Hangout,

                                                                            Doc2Doc
  Thematic     Social networking sites centered on a particular theme;     Telehelp,

 networking    for example disaster response, nursing, etc. These share   Innocentive,
    sites      many aspects of, and operate as a community of              23andMe,
               practice.                                                PatientsLikeMe

                                                                         CureTogether
    Wiki       Wikis are used to denote communal websites where            Wikipedia,
               content can be quickly and easily edited. Wikis support      Fluwiki

               collaboration   and   information    sharing;   feature
               multimedia, such as video, slides, photographs, and
               allow anyone to edit whereas others are password

               protected. [60]
  Mashups      A website that combines data and functionality from        HealthMap,
               two or more services to create a new, value-added,          Google Flu

               service. [63]




                                                                                    24
Table 2.2 Categorical Definitions of Social Media (continued)
 Service Type                         Definition                            Example
               A website where information is filtered or collected

               according     to   patterns.   Techniques     involving
Collaborative  collaboration among multiple agents, viewpoints, and
   Filtering   data sources are often used. These agents engage          Digg, Delicious

    Sites      through a variety of sites, through a process called
               crowdsourcing, where the crowds join forces for a
               common purpose. [64]

               A hosting service that allows individuals to upload and
               create galleries of photos, videos, and other digital
   Media       media (e.g., slide presentations). The host will then       SlideShare,
Sharing Sites                                                            YouTube, Flickr
               store them on a server and make them either publicly
               or privately available.
               Multi-User Virtual Environments, also known as Virtual
    Other                                                                 Second Life
               Worlds.

                                       RESULTS


       A total of 62 articles, 43 websites, and 11 reports (or policies) were evaluated,


reviewed and synthesized to inform the development of this article. Results are

presented in the proceeding seven sections, according to social media tool functionality.


Blogs


       The first social media were adopted in the late 1990s in the form of web-logs (a

term which was later shortened to form the word Blog). Web-based software platforms


like Open Diary enhanced accessibility from a technical perspective and allowed the lay


public to create a communal website where new (unrelated) users could voice their

opinions about any topic and collaborate to create a communal dialogue. Blogs foster


open access to information (both opinion and fact), contribute largely to the number of


new websites created on the Internet and are often picked up by mainstream media,

which makes them an important vehicle for social change. [65] For example, Paul Levy,


the former President and CEO of Beth Israel Deaconess Centre in Boston, MA, was one


                                                                                     25
of the first healthcare executives to run a blog about the aspects of, and his reflections

on, his public position and decisions as a public authority with significant power, and on


the transparency of clinical outcomes at the hospital for which he had responsibility.[66]


       Although the literature on the use of blogs in Medline is growing, only one study

has formally evaluated the attitudes, perceptions, and realities of the medical


Blogosphere. Indeed, Kovic and colleagues [65] who conducted an online survey of


medical bloggers, found that successful medical bloggers are most often highly

educated writers (with masters or doctoral-level degrees) who are faithful to their


sources and readers, and are motivated to influence how others think by sharing their


practical knowledge or skills in a creative manner.

       In terms of education and awareness, educational institutions in healthcare have


used blogs to foster reflective peer-to-peer learning, which allow for open discussions


and a formal log of medical training; as well as the implementation of new protocols.

[67] Many hospitals also use blogs for community outreach to: 1) feature their “first


class” facilities [66] (e.g., a story of the newest device or test not owned by a


competitor); 2) positive patient experiences [68] (e.g., Mayo Clinic’s Piano Foyer Video,

where two unrelated patients meet and play the piano together while in hospital); or 3)


feature celebrity-type physicians who operate on famous people or athletes. [69] Blogs


are also used by hospitals to disseminate disease-specific information as an electronic

form of the patient education leaflets handed out at the bedside. [70]


       Blogs have been used in clinical research for clinical trial recruitment and data


collection, allowing patients to ask questions about the trial procedures, risks, and



                                                                                       26
incentives while maintaining an anonymous, non-threatening environment. [71] Mayo


clinic has also used blogs focused on Major Depressive Disorder to request feedback on

the patient experience, and some of the Integrative Medicine practices they follow. [46]


        For remote monitoring, patients have been creative in their use of blogs.

           8
SixUntilMe , for example, features the life of a patient living with type 1 diabetes (Kerri

Morrone Sparling), insulin pumps, continuous glucose monitors, and diabetes advocacy.


[72] Cancer patients have also used blogs as a narrative of the patient experience with

                                                                     9
chemotherapy. Dave deBronkart, who is a well-known e-patient advocate, used his


blog to inform family members and his attending (family) physician of changes in tumor

growth from a self-created spreadsheet of radiology reports of tumor size data. [73]


Also, in May of 2011, the Vancouverite Derek K. Miller had a friend post his auto-


obituary after dying from stage 4 metastatic colorectal cancer. What is most interesting


about     this   particular   example      is   that    his   self-obituary    blog    post

(http://www.penmachine.com/) “went viral”, receiving more than four million views in


the four days after his death – a rather startling example of the potential reach of health


related social media.


        In peer-to-peer communication among healthcare workers, blogs have been

used for (virtual) rounding. The Clinical Cases Blog (http://casesblog.blogspot.com) is a


model for this in the medical blogosphere, as it features cases in Allergy and


Immunology, Cardiology, Pulmonology, Gastroenterology, Nephrology, Endocrinology,

8
  The name for this blog stems from age at which the author was diagnosed with
Diabetes.
9
 ePatients are patients that are internet savvy, empowered, and engaged in their own
care. [74]


                                                                                         27
Haematology, Rheumatology, Infectious Diseases, Neurology, Geriatrics, and Pain

Management. Moreover, this blog also has a special section on admission note


templates (e.g., Congestive Heart Failure), procedure guides, and similar material. Figure


2.1 (below) displays an example case from this Blog.

                     Figure 2.1: A Sample Rounding Blogging Case


























       With regard to disease and epidemic outbreak tracking, citizen-report photo


blogs have been used to inform hospitals of incoming mass casualty events (e.g.,

Hudson River plane landing). Equally interesting, is how the US military has used natural


language processing to automatically filter and retrieve information on blog posts by


military servicemen as a means to monitor emotions and Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder

after operational deployment. [75]


       There are many other examples of medical blogs, which lie outside of the


aforementioned categories. However, both the Medgadget and iMedicalApps Blogs are



                                                                                    28
well known for their annual (winter) competitions, which feature the best medical blogs

and (mobile device) application reviews based on a public voting system. (Table 2.3


features a brief description of the 2010 Medgadget Blog Award Winners.)


Table 2.3: Medgaget Top Blogs for 2010
 Blog Category      Site Name                        Site Description
                                   This blog by an Intensivist from New York City

  Best Medical                     exposes interesting issues in the practice of
                    EMCrit blog    Emergency    Medicine.   The   site  also  features
      Blog                         podcasts discussing procedures, checklists, and

                                   other factoids about the ER.
                                   This humorous blog by a hospitalist in Silicon Valley
   Best New                        features music videos, poems about Santa with
                     ZDoggMD
  Medical Blog                     gout, and other funny things for clinicians in an
                                   emotionally tense environment.
                                   This anonymous blog is written by an ER physician

  Best Literary   StorytellERdoc   who writes about the grace, passion, and sadness of
  Medical Blog                     medical practice and the shared humanity between
                                   practitioners and patients in the ER.

                                   This group blog about geriatrics and palliative care
                                   features evidence-based reviews. The site also
  Best Clinical       GeriPal      invites (new) qualified authors to contribute their
      Blog
                                   content and has developed into a community with
                                   passion and focus.
                                   This blog discusses the various facets of health care

  Best Health         Covert       rationing; including causes, effects, and how to
 Policies/Ethics                   address underlying factors. The author is a retired
      Blog        Rationing Blog   professor and researcher in cardiology and cardiac

                                   electrophysiology.
  Best Medical                     This blog features news and brief reportage-style

 Technologies /     Science Roll   commentaries on everything from computers to
  Informatics                      patients and doctors. Other resources are also
    Weblog                         available on medical informatics and genetics.

                                   This patient blog covers a spectrum of issues from
                                   living with Multiple Sclerosis to research news and
 Best Patient’s     Wheelchair     lifestyle articles. The author is regarded as an
      Blog           Kamikaze
                                   authority for patients with MS and fosters a support
                                   community with his blog posts.







                                                                                    29
This section on blogs cannot conclude without an acknowledgement to the Really

Simple Syndication (RSS) web standard. RSS allows software, known as RSS readers, to


pull content and create an email-like inbox of blogs and other websites (e.g., PubMed)


that are frequently updated. This is useful when a user wants to create a customized

“feed” of information that is relevant to their interests and classify them accordingly, for


easy retrieval in the future. Among the most notable RSS readers are Google Reader,


iGoogle, and Bloglines.

       Overall, Blogs are the oldest; most established and evaluated form of social


media, with the earliest articles as early as 2004, noting their use in medicine and family


practice. [76] A number of peer-review articles on Blogs have also been published; these

mainly note their effectiveness how they can be used to disseminate best practices [77];


their applications in assessing clinical knowledge learned [78]; and how they can be


used to promote reflection and professional development. [67]

Microblogs


       The most dynamic and concise form of information exchange on social media


occurs on microblogs (e.g., through tweets). Consisting of 140 character-long updates,

these short 21 century telegrams, allow users to view large amounts of content over a


short period of time. Today, a large number of microblogging platforms exist, which


cater to audiences varying from the corporate world to teenagers, however Twitter is

and has remained the most prominent service on the market. Twitter updates are


known as tweets.






                                                                                       30
       Newcomers to Twitter often perceive the update-length as a barrier to

communication. This misconception usually decreases with repeated use, as tweets are


easily supplemented with shortened hyperlinks to other digital media, such as videos or


websites. “Tweeps” (people who tweet) also often use other services that connect to

the Twitter platform (e.g., TweetDeck, HootSuite), which allow them to organize their


tweets, manage information, and see website previews or pictures without having to


click on a link and open a new web browser window. Some of these services also sort,

filter, and curate tweets, allowing a user to see updates related to a particular topic,


such as healthcare. In turn, this has caused a new technical language to emerge, a


glossary of which can be found on Table 2.4.

Table 2.4: A selection of common Twitter terminology (adapted from [79])

  Terminology                                  Definition
                   The @ sign is used to call out other users within a tweet. When a
       @           username is preceded by the @ sign, it becomes a link to a Twitter

                   profile.
     Avatar        The personal image uploaded to a Twitter profile.
                   To block someone on Twitter means they will be unable to follow

      Block        you or add you to their lists, and will not deliver their mentions (see
                   below) to your mentions tab
 Direct Message
                   These are private Tweets between two users.
      (DM)
     Favorite      A tweet marked as favorite saves the message for later viewing.

  Follow Count     The number of people that follow a user, as well as how many
                   people that user follows.
    Follower       A follower is a separate Twitter who follows “you”.

                   The most commonly used hashtag #FF, it recommends who other
                   users should follow based on personal experience and interactions
  Follow Friday    with other users. #FF is used on a Friday and it is a form of social

                   courtesy.
 Following (verb)  The act of following another user.
                   Tagging (metadata) added to a tweet, which denotes the

   Geotagging      geographical location from where the message was sent; enabling
                   this feature allows users to disclose where they are in real-time.



                                                                                   31
Table 2.4: A selection of common Twitter terminology (continued)
   Terminology                                   Definition
                     A user's "Twitter handle" is the username they have selected and

      Handle         the        respective       accompanying          URL         (e.g.,
                     http://twitter.com/username
                     The # symbol is used to mark keywords or topics in a Tweet. It
     Hashtag
                     serves to search the twitter sphere on a particular topic.
      Listed         To be included in another Twitter user's list.
                     These are publicly or individually curated groups of Twitter users.

       Lists         They are often used as a filter to find tweets of users who follow a
                     particular topic (e.g., Cardiologists)

     Mentions        Mentioning another user in a tweet by including their handle.
                     A Tweet posted in reply to another user's message, usually posted
                     by clicking the "reply" button next to their Tweet within a timeline.
       Reply
                     If the users’ twitter timeline are public, it allows people to follow
                     the tweet conversation and response thread.
                     A Tweet by another user, forwarded to you by someone you

  Retweet (noun)     follow. Often used to spread news or share valuable information
                     and allows it to spread virally.
                     The act of forwarding another user's Tweet to a user’s personal
  Retweet (verb)
                     followers
                     A function of twitter (found at http://search.twitter.com) to search
      Search         for usernames, hashtags, or a particular subject. (This function is

                     generally limited to the past 2 weeks of public tweets.)
                     URL shorteners are used to turn long web addresses (URLs) into
 Short URL (SURL)    shorter URLs.

       Spam          Unwanted messaging or following on Twitter.
     Timeline        A real-time list of Tweets on Twitter.
   Tweet (noun)      A message posted via Twitter containing 140 characters (or fewer).

    Tweeterer        An account holder on Twitter who posts and reads Tweets.
                     To cease following another Twitter user. This will cause their
     Unfollow
                     Tweets to no longer show up in a user’s home timeline.
                     A discrete code that allows a twitter user to feature their “tweets”
      Widget         in real time on a different website (e.g., a blog).




       Tweets and tweeting styles can be classified in three broad categories. [80]


Substantive tweets are independently understandable (e.g., a tweet with an abridged

title or author of a paper, a brief comment, and a link to the publication; or a headline


teaser to a blog). Conversational tweets are fragments of a new or ongoing conversation


                                                                                     32
and draw on professional or personal interests or comment on current events (e.g., I am

doing research with my supervisor, Dr. Kendall Ho, at the Vancouver General Hospital


Emergency Department). Finally, there are hybrid tweets, which are substantive and


conversational at the same time (e.g., discussing my supervisor’s newest Nature

publication at the Mahoney and Sons pub http://examplehyperlinktopicture.com).


       In medicine and healthcare, there have been over 140 reported uses for Twitter,


a synthesis of which can be found on Table 2.5. [81]

Table 2.5: 140 Healthcare Uses for Twitter (Synthesized)

1. Tissue recruitment (blood, kidneys, etc.)  14. Promoting Domestic Violence
2. Epidemiological data collection (e.g.,         awareness
    http://www.sickweather.com/)              15. Raising Child Abuse awareness

3. Disaster alerting and response             16. USMLE preparation for medical
4. Emergency response team                        licensing
    communication and management              17. NCLEX for preparation for nursing

5. Supportive care for patients and family        licensing
    members (including weight, exercise,      18. Recruitment of health care staff
    and smoking cessation support)            19. Alcohol and other substance abuse

6. Diabetes management (blood glucose             support
    tracking)                                 20. Triage management in emergency
7. Health diaries                                 rooms

8. Adverse event reporting in the clinical    21. Census management/monitoring
    setting and related pharmacovigilance     22. Crowdsourcing health care resources
9. Silent code alarms (e.g., psychiatric      23. Shift-bidding for nurses and other

    emergencies, security incidents)              health care professionals
10. FDA Drug safety alerts                    24. Mood tracking (for patients with
11. Amber (and related) alert notifications       bipolar and other mood disorders)

12. Biomedical device data capture and        25. Patient care reminders in the clinical
    reporting                                     setting
13. Coordinating preoperative,                26. Prescription management, including

    perioperative and postoperative care          pharmacy refill reminders
    (among pharmacy, nursing and surgical     27. Daily health tips from authoritative
    services)                                     sources









                                                                                       33
Table 2.5: 140 Healthcare Uses for Twitter (continued)
28. Location awareness during crises         53. Connecting genetic researchers with
29. Occupational safety response                 physicians

30. Hazardous materials communication        54. Publishing the latest advances in
31. “Quick and dirty” diagnostic                 biomedical devices
    brainstorming between physicians         55. Issuing asthma alerts

    (e.g., ’symptom clustering’)             56. Data collection for tracking facility
32. Clinical case education (residents           patterns (process-performance, supply-
    following attendings)                        chain and staffing problems)

33. Physician opinion-sharing                57. Live-tweeting medical conferences (so
34. Environmental alerts: pollen counts,         they can be followed by non
    pollution levels, heat waves, severe         attendants)

    weather alerts                           58. Keyword-tracking of health-related
35. Remote wound care assistance                 topics via Twitter search (and API
36. Rural area health care communication         connected applications)

37. Micro-sharing of pertinent patient       59. Improving medical rounding systems
    information                              60. Clinical trial awareness, recruitment,
38. Micro-sharing of diagnostic results          and participant invitations (e.g., Trial-X)

    (blood tests, echocardiography,          61. Sharing peer-to-peer reviews of articles
    radiological images)                         of interest
39. Customer service interactions            62. Connecting patients with similar

40. Publishing health-related news               disease processes
41. Psychiatric “check-ins” for patients     63. Enhancing health-related support
42. Nursing mentoring and collaboration          groups (e.g. buddy-systems for

43. Publishing disease-specific tips             depression)
44. Childcare support                        64. Medical appliance technical support
45. Fund raising for hospitals and health-       (e.g. at-home: colostomy care, infusion-

    related causes                               pumps, wound-vacs)
46. Updating patient family members          65. Reporting medical device malfunctions
    during procedures                        66. Arranging appointments with health

47. Live-tweeting surgical procedures for        care providers
    education                                67. Product, and food safety alerts
48. Rare diseases tracking and resource      68. Information on women’s health

    connection                               69. Pain management
49. Reporting hospital staff injuries        70. Community health outreach
50. Tracking patient and disease-specific    71. Bioterrorism awareness and

    trends                                       preparedness
51. Checking hospital ratings with health    72. Patient-sharing of health-related
    care consumers                               experiences

52. Providing around-the-clock disease       73. Community management and
    management guidance                       development between patients of related
                                              conditions

                                             74. Mental health awareness



                                                                                       34
```Table 2.5: 140 Healthcare Uses for Twitter (continued)
75. Food bank resource management            85. Publishing vaccination/immunization
76. Exposing medical quackery                 services (e.g., locations, hours and

77. Discussing public health care policy      reminders)
78. Developing stronger patient-provider     86. Obtaining information on Medicare
 relationships                                and Medicaid

79. Following health marketing               87. Clinical education coordination
80. Exchanging/soliciting scientific         88. Whistle blowing (e.g., reporting
 validation of alternative health claims      breeches of universal precautions in

81. Interprofessional (logistical             health care facilities)
 communication and collaboration             89. Posting daily nursing tips
82. Public safety announcements              90. Exchanging physician humor

83. Tracking the progress of developing      91. Coordinating allied health care services
 pharmaceuticals                              during patient admissions
84. Broadcasting infant care tips to new      92. Post-discharge patient consultations

 parents                                         and follow-up care



        In terms of medical education, there have been some interesting applications of

Twitter. The Pennsylvania State College of Medicine has used Twitter to augment peer-


to-peer and instructor-to-student learning [82] by stimulating topic discussions,


providing feedback on critical thinking, conducting course evaluations, disseminating

writing prompts, soliciting class responses, and monitoring student progress. Second, a


junior doctor and a medical student started a Twitter Journal Club [83] that functions in


the same manner as traditional journal clubs, except that the means for discussion is

Twitter. By using a combination of blog posts, where the paper and discussion questions

                                              10
are posted in advance, along the hash tag       #TwitJC, students, doctors, and anyone


interested in the subject can engage and interact in a meaningful way. The club meets

on Sunday fortnights at 2000h (GMT).






10See Table 2.4 for the definition of a hashtag.


                                                                                       35
       In terms of health service delivery, two physicians have used @tweetspreekuur

since October of 2009 for primary care consultations. [84] Using the concept of learning


by doing, the service was launched with little planning. After one year, their tweeting


practice has shown that consultations encompass all areas of primary care though the

main reasons for contact are advice, reassurance, and triage. Typically, questions and


answers vary from one to eight tweets in length and about one third of the


communication takes place publicly, while the other two-thirds takes place through

direct messages. Pictures of skin and genital related problems have also been sent to


the service.


       Presently, @tweetspreekuur is run on a voluntary basis (there is no

reimbursement to the physicians who run the service) and the attending physicians who


run the service stipulate that their success is due to language (consultations take place


in Dutch, limiting their audience), and the option for patients to continue the

consultation through a secure online platform, which is only available in the


Netherlands. Today, preliminary research [85] suggests that Twitter has been effective


at providing access to care at a low cost, running the service is fun and entertaining for

the providers, and the level of user satisfaction is high.


       In this section, it is important to draw attention to hashtags, which are a form of


information curation that allow people to find tweets related to a particular discussion

or topic. Among the most common are #HCSM or Health Care Social Media and its


Canadian (#HCSMCA), European (#HCSMEU) and Latin American (#HCSMLA) variants,


#Med2, #MDChat, and #Health20. For example, a tweet that has both the #Med2 and



                                                                                     36
#HCSMCA hashtags will be read by people who filter tweets because of their interest in

information related to social media in Canada; as well as the Medicine 2.0 conference


series.


       On the negative end, there are a large number of bots (e.g., Robots) that re-

tweet and spam Twitter users who use particular words, phrases, or hashtags in order to


increase their user reach and digital footprint; however these phony users are typically


removed by the Twitter service relatively quickly due to the “report spam” feature on

the site. Also, due to the limited size of a person’s profile, it is essential that Twitter


users double check the identity of the person whom they are communicating with, as it


is easy to create a fake profile and communicate with an unknown charlatan on the

service.


Social Networking Sites


       Although different types of social media are often categorized as social

networking sites, for the purposes of this research, social networking sites will be


defined as web-browser accessible services, which allow users to create social


connections in a public or semi-public form (through the use of profiles) in order to

share information updates with other site users. Wikipedia, the online user-generated


encyclopaedia, further expands on this definition with a number of concepts, as can be


seen below [61]:

       A social networking service is an online service, platform, or site that

       focuses on facilitating the building of social networks or social relations
       among people who, for example, share interests, activities, backgrounds,
       or real-life connections. A social network service consists of a

       representation of each user (often a profile), his/her social links, and a
       variety of additional services. Most social network services are web-based


                                                                                       37
       and provide means for users to interact over the Internet [through]
       instant messaging. Online community services are sometimes considered
       as a social network service, though in a broader sense, social network

       service usually means an individual-centered service whereas online
       community services are group-centered. Social networking sites allow
       users to share ideas, activities, events, and interests within their individual

       networks.

       A large number of peer-reviewed articles have been published under the MESH


headings of Social Networking Sites and Web 2.0 [45], with much of the literature


centered on issues around maintaining professionalism, ethical practices, identity, and

privacy. However, given that these subjects apply to all types of social media, they are


addressed in the discussion section.


       An iconic paper by Farmer and colleagues (2009) [86] evaluated the relationship

between Facebook groups and common medical conditions. They found that the most


common type of groups on Facebook were centered on specific medical conditions (e.g.,


malignant tumors), peer-to-peer support, and fundraising for support groups,

organizations, and individuals. Farmer and colleagues also found that researchers used


Facebook to aggregate themselves into a “network” for dissemination of their research


to other researchers and health care providers. They also identified the existence of

self-aggregated negative-behaviour support groups, mainly centered on the promotion


of excessive alcohol consumption.


        Similarly, in July of 2011 Bender and colleagues [87] found that the majority of

those who use social networking sites use them to form self-aggregated interest groups.


Within a single disease, Breast Cancer, a search on Facebook revealed over six hundred


support groups organized around four central themes: fundraising, awareness,



                                                                                     38
marketing, and general support. General support groups were not used as an adjunct to

supportive care nor served as a general form of patient-to-patient support; rather, they


were most often created by a user (or family member) with cancer as a means to keep


friends and family members updated on their treatment and, at the same time, receive

supportive feedback. Bender et al. also noted the fact that their results may be skewed


due to the fact that they were only able to analyze public groups, which had very few


user contributions as a whole, and that the technical architecture of Facebook, which

makes it difficult to have a fictitious profile when compared to other (more open) social


media, such as twitter, may be responsible for skewing the data. This is a general


limitation of research on social media sites, all closed profiles and private conversations

cannot be evaluated unless the patient him or herself discloses the content of these


interactions. This literature review did not find any formal research comparing “closed”


groups on Facebook.

       Another interesting use of Facebook group occurred in Taiwan [88], where a


well-known emergency physician blogger created a public group to ask his collages as to


how they could improve patient wait times in the emergency room. In less than a

month, the group grew virally, with the majority of emergency department staff from


around Taiwan proposing solutions. Eventually, the group received so much attention


that the Minister of Health himself (and his staff) joined the group and commented

directly, using the comments from its fifteen hundred plus group members to make


policy decisions. This culminated with the minister making visits to emergency


departments in ten different cities and promising to initiate a dialogue to improve



                                                                                     39
funding and reduce wait times in emergency departments in collaboration with the

Taiwanese Bureau of National Health Insurance.


       A less documented facet of social networking sites is the third-party applications


that can be created within these services. Third party applications work through the

integration of application programming interfaces (APIs) that allow outside software


and data to be visualized. In Facebook, the most prominent of these is Zynga’s Farmville


Game, which allows people to create a virtual farm and, by interacting with other

Facebook friends, acquire a virtual currency that can be used to buy virtual goods, such


as tractors or animals.


       Similar examples within health can be found in an article by Fernandez-Luque

and colleagues [89] that searched for, and evaluated, these “apps” within Facebook.


This research found that less than 30% of listed applications were real and the


remaining 70% were non-functioning “spam.” In their evaluation of the 56 working

applications Fernandez-Luque and colleagues found that these software were


thematically centered around: fitness and weight loss, specific health conditions (e.g.,


diabetes) education, smoking cessation, and fundraising for health and research-related

activities. The most notable included “Get up and move” which allows people to


challenge their friends to engage in physical activity and report on it after they have


completed it; the American Heart Association’s “START” application, which was part of a

heart portal and allowed users to answer questionnaires on cardiovascular health and


upload the data to a health portal; and HealthSeeker a diabetes management education


app (See Figure 2.2) allowing users to learn how to better manage their diabetes and



                                                                                     40
gain “points” that could be used for incentive draws in the process. Although not

specifically named, two other applications were also described, these allowed users to


make appointments for blood donations. Only one application was made for physicians,


which was used as a forum to answer patient questions.

 Figure 2.2: The HealthSeeker Diabetes Education App on Facebook




























       Within the research realm, Bull and colleagues published a reflective case study


that discusses the ethical questions that emerged during a randomized controlled trial

of preventative HIV education for high-risk teens in the United States. [90] They found


that maintaining ethical principles was the most difficult part of using Facebook for


research purposes. In particular, maintaining beneficence, improving knowledge and

information comprehension, ensuring equity of special populations, and safeguarding


confidentiality and security were the largest challenges to the study’s implementation.




                                                                                     41
To overcome these problems, Bull and colleagues referred study participants from a

Facebook fan page to an external website, which was congruent with the US Health


Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) and their Institutional Review


Board’s requirements. Bull and colleagues concluded by recommending that researchers

who plan to collect data from social networking sites consider whether the social


networking service is the appropriate vehicle for participant recruitment, that they offer


multiple venues for participants to provide informed consent, and that all data are

safeguarded behind secure firewalls, preferably outside the original social networking


site.


Professional and Thematic Networking Sites

       Professional networking sites are aimed solely for interactions related to a


person’s professional career or business. LinkedIn is the most popular and does not


solely focus on medicine or healthcare; it allows people to publicly display a curriculum

vita along with personal and institutional affiliations. Unlike Facebook, which allows


people to “friend” each other, LinkedIn uses connections, which publicly show people


that may have worked together or know each other. Should a person be new to the site,

connections can also be used to visualize the number of degrees of separation between


two or more people. Figure 2.3 displays a public profile on LinkedIn.














                                                                                       42
           Figure 2.3: A public profile on LinkedIn



























       A number of healthcare specific professional networking sites also exist; these

include Sermo, Asklepios, Doctors’ Hangout, Ozmosis, Doc2Doc, and others, which try to


recreate the intimacy of the “physicians’ lounge” in an online environment. These sites


most often require the clinician to submit their credentials to a site gatekeeper, thus

creating the perception of an elitist forum that is “safe” from patient’s eyes. Discussions


in these sites typically range from dating in a medical environment, ethics, clinical trial


and medication reviews, biostatistics, and specific treatment options. A combination of

business models are also used by these sites, which vary from financial sponsorship by a


professional association (e.g., Asklepios by the Canadian Medical Association),


advertisement, anonymized data vending to external stakeholders (e.g., insurance

companies, pharmaceutical companies, etc), commission on prizes offered by





                                                                                      43
companies trying to solve a particular problem (e.g., InnoCentive), and research by

external stakeholders (e.g., surveys on physician medication prescription habits).


       Thematic networking sites are analogous to professional networking sites, but


centered on a particular theme. These include telemedicine (e.g., Telehelp), informatics

(e.g., Health Informatics Forum), nursing (e.g., SocialRN), genomics (e.g., 23andMe) and


patients (e.g., PatientsLikeMe), among others. Of particular interest are patient


thematic networking sites, as a number of these sites collect, aggregate, and visualize

patient data to promote patient-driven research (research that was initiated by a


patient and used to collaborate with other patients with the same or a related disease).


[91]

       One site that promotes patient-driven research is CureTogether; it collects a


number of health metrics including weight, caloric intake, sleep, exercise, and other


disease-specific indicators. [92] Although the site is not meant to constitute medical

advice, it allows patients to summarize statistics on treatment efficacy, side effects, and


causes of disease, ultimately helping people make more informed treatment decisions.


For example, on its chronic fatigue syndrome page, CureTogether has amalgamated

responses from over thirteen hundred patients, encompassing nearly seven thousand


data points on effective treatments. Indeed, it is this “crowdsourced” or collective


wisdom from large numbers of patients approach what is believed to combat single

stakeholder bias – a concept that remains contested by experts today, as it is difficult to


prove, in terms of accuracy and validity, that a third parties have not intervened in how






                                                                                       44
results are displayed to users. Figure 2.4 displays a summary page on different


treatment effectiveness for chronic fatigue syndrome.

Figure 2.4: CureTogether’s Page on Chronic Fatigue Syndrome
























Wikis

             11
        Wikis   are easy-to-publish websites that can be quickly and easily edited by


multiple users; they feature both text and multimedia content. Within medicine, the

most commonly cited and used wiki is Wikipedia, which receives over 150 million page


views per month, with the top 200 medical articles receiving over 100,000 monthly page


views. [93] Additionally, the Health Library Wiki of Canada (a UBC Library initiative) lists


over 61 medical wikis and wikibooks available to healthcare professionals and patients

alike. These can be found on Table 2.6.






11The term wiki was borrowed from the Hawaiian language; and it stands for quick; it is

a metaphor of the speed with which information can be accessed, added, and edited on
a wiki.


                                                                                        45
Table 2.6: 61 Medical Wikis
1. AIDS Wiki                                     32. OpenWetWare

2. Ask Dr Wiki                                   33. Onco Wiki
3.  Clinfowiki                                   34. Orthopaedic Surgery (wikibook)
4.  Clinical Research Informatics Wiki           35. Pathology Informatics wiki

5.  Demystifying Depression (wikibook)           36. Pathpedia
6.  Diabetes Wiki                                37. Pharmacology (wikibook)
7.  Diagnostic Radiology (wikibook)              38. Physiopedia
8.  EBHC Search Strategies Wiki                  39. Psychology wiki

9.  EBM Librarian                                40. Quality of Medical Data
10. ECGpedia                                     41. Radiation Oncology (wikibook)
11. Emergency Medicine (wikibook)                42. Radiopaedia.org

12. EyeWiki                                      43. Street Medic Wikia
13. FluWiki                                      44. Surgical Procedures (wikibook)
14. Ganfyd - Get A Note From Your Doctor (U.K.)  45. Toronto Public Library Health &

15. Handbook of Genetic Counseling (wikibook)        Wellness
16. HealthGrid wiki                              46. UCLA Radiology Residents
17. Health++                                     47. Urgencyclopédie
                                                 48. WardWiki
18. HLWIKI Canada
19. Human Physiology (wikibook)                  49. WebHealth
20. Immunology (wikibook)                        50. Wellness Wiki
21. McGill Library Global Health Resource Guide  51. wikiCancer

22. Medical Imaging                              52. WikiDoc
23. Medpedia                                     53. Wikiecho
24. MedSkills wiki project                       54. WikiHealth

25. MIGHEALTHNET (Migrant Health)                55. WikiHealthCare
26. MLA-HLS Wiki                                 56. Wikikidney.org
27. NAHRS/MLA Nursing Resources wiki             57. WikiMD

28. Neurodegeneration Research Wiki              58. WikiPatient
29. NursingWiki                                  59. Wikisurgery
30. Open Anesthesia                              60. WikiTox
                                                 61. Wikiversity School of Medicine
31. Open Medicine



        Although Wikipedias’ accuracy and completeness are often debated, as is the

content of many wikis, research by Clauson and colleagues [39] compared Wikipedia’s

                                                            12
drug information with the Medscape Drug Reference.             This research found that


Wikipedia had very few factual errors and that it included approximately 76% of the

12
  Medscape.com is an advertisement-funded health care professional information site.
It features content on drugs, research articles, and medical specialties.


                                                                                         46
content found Medscape (a validated and trusted information source). [39] Wikipedia

was also found to foster quality/accuracy of information improvements over a period of


ninety days, due to crowdsourcing, which was not the case with Medpedia due to their


more restrictive editorial process. [39] In their concluding remarks, Clauson et al. noted

that Wikipedia was a good starting point for health information consumers, despite


being narrower in scope, less complete, and with more errors of omission than


Medscape.


       In terms of its editorial membership, a recent article published by Wikipedia’s

medical editorial board [93] noted some of the dilemmas faced on this digital space.


Among the weaknesses noted is the fact that some people and organizations (e.g., the


pharmaceutical industry) have used the site to advance their personal and corporate

mandates. Also, Wikipedia’s knotty user architecture uses a pseudonym whenever


content is written or edited, which makes it very difficult to verify the expertise or


credentials of content authors and editors. Among its strengths, Wikipedia’s medical

editors noted the promotion of an article to Good Article Status, which requires the


independent review by at least one editor, and a group of editors for promotion to


Featured Article, a process that is analogous to peer review. Becoming an editor on

                                                         13
Wikipedia is also no easy task, as user rank promotion     is subject to a public voting

system where the date, and number of articles edited and authored are evaluated by


other Wikipedia users and editors; also IP addresses are cross checked, to prevent a



13Wikipedians (people who contribute to Wikipedia) are democratically promoted and

ranked based on the number of contributions (e.g., new articles, edits, etc.) that they
provide to the Wikipedia site and community in general.


                                                                                      47
single person from voting themselves in. Wikipedia has a style manual [93], which, for

example, prevents drug dosages from being added to the site in order to prevent


patient harm from an unqualified person or charlatan with initiative to (self) diagnose


and prescribe the wrong medication. There is also an elaborate process of content

verifiability, should disputes arise between editors, to ensue successful conflict


resolution and neutrality of the information.


       Other notable wiki use for public health include the WHO’s International

Classification of Diseases 11 update experiment [94], which opened the IDC


classification system that is used around the world to clinicians for them to add new


codes, that they thought should be considered, before the WHO ratified the new

classification strata through its internal processes. Along similar lines is the Medskills


wiki, which is a wikibook that compiles physical assessment techniques, a tool that


allows students to learn without having to buy expensive textbooks. Wikisurgery, a free

surgical encyclopedia; and OpenWetWare, which features a number of laboratory


procedures to facilitate the learning steps of complicated laboratory techniques (e.g., a


DNA polymerase chain reaction).

       It is important to note that a large variety of wiki-like software exist on the


Internet. These include Google Documents (GDocs), which is a word processing program


analogous in functionality to Microsoft Word but with the added benefit of

simultaneous synchronous user collaboration, and automatic document publishing as a


web-page. [95] Similarly, etherpad, is a an open source, low bandwidth, massive user


(>30) collaborative writing tool, particularly suitable for simultaneously working on a



                                                                                    48
document during (tele)conferences and meetings with a large number of attendees, due

to its minimalistic interface. [96]


       This wiki section cannot end without mentioning one of the largest problems


with wikis. These are attracting and maintaining a critical mass of content contributors

and editors; as well as dealing with wiki damage, which occurs through (human or


robot) spam, link rot, deletion of information such as medication side effects (despite


the ability to see a history of changes, similar to Microsoft Word’s Track Changes

feature), and the deliberate insertion of misinformation (e.g., neutraceutical companies


noting that their products can cure cancer and other similar claims [93]).


Mashups

       Mashups are portmanteaus (e.g., hybrids) of two or more web services, which


use APIs to create a new service or functionality. The term was borrowed from the


music industry, where separate music tracks are combined by DJs to create a new song.

The first medical mashups originated in the form of analog Geographical Information


Systems, similar to John Snow’s map of the Cholera outbreak in London in 1854. [97]


Today, a large number of medical mashups exist (see Table 2.7) ranging from infection

disease visualization (e.g., HealthMap.org) to PubMed search engines, which use


semantic technologies to find peer-reviewed articles, which closely match an author’s


written block of text (e.g., ETBlast3).











                                                                                     49
Figure 2.7: Some Well Known Health-related Mashups
     Site Name/Address                             Brief Description
                               Typically known as a world visualization website, Google

1.        Google Earth         Earth allows time-enabled maps in order to track
                               worldwide flu trends by using google.com symptom
                               search queries.

                               Healthmap, which is led by a multidisciplinary team in
                               Boston’s Children’s Hospital, uses informal data sources
2.       Healthmap.org         for real-time world-wide disease surveillance and

                               outbreak monitoring.
                               Sickweather    uses  a   patent-pending    algorithm  to
                               aggregate data from Facebook and Twitter along with
3.      Sickweather.com
                               self-reported data in order to forecast, track and map a
                               number of illnesses around the world.
                               Whoissick aims to provide current and local sickness

                               information to the public. Although it was one of the
                               first disease visualization mashups, today the site has
                               little data and is likely to be defunct in the near future.
4.        Whoissick.org
                               The main reason is a lack of a community, which
                               provides data to the site. Who is sick also does not
                               reveal which data sources it uses to visualize disease and

                               symptom outbreaks.
                               eTBLAST is an article search engine which looks for peer
                               reviewed articles, such as those on PubMed, which

                               resemble any block of text. Thus, one can write a
5.  etest.vbi.vt.edu/etblast3  paragraph and look for articles, which will support the
                               premises noted. This mashup is a project of the

                               Innovation   Laboratory   at   Virginia’s Bioinformatics
                               Institute.



An example, which illustrates both the importance and need for mashups by large


organizations, is Healthmap. Financed by the Google Foundation and supported by the


Canadian Institutes for Health Research, US Centers for Disease Control and the

National Library of Medicine, HealthMap uses Fisher-Robinson Bayesian     14 filtering to


aggregate information from the World Health Organizations’ Information System

14 Fisher-Robinson Bayesian filtering is a technique which uses degrees of belief for

statistical inference, rather than the (more widely known) frequentist approach for
hypothesis testing which uses confidence intervals. [98]


                                                                                     50
(WHOSIS), the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), the Program for Monitoring

Emerging Diseases (ProMED-mail) databases, Geosentinel (the global surveillance


program from of the International Society of Travel Medicine), the World Organization


for Animal Health, the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control, Baidu and

Baidu News, and Google News. [99] HealthMap is interesting because it combines a


very large variety of data sources and APIs (e.g., Google Maps, Google Translate and


Xajax) to create a highly powerful information resource that can be “zoomed” all the

way to relatively small geographic regions (e.g. suburbs). When looking for disease


outbreaks all details are dependent on the source data, which means that while some


geographic regions may display a high level of information, others may not; a general

weakness of the site. Figure 2.5 displays the HealthMap Mashup for North American


Disease Outbreaks.


Figure 2.5: North American Outbreaks in the HealthMap Mashup



























                                                                                    51
Collaborative Filtering

       Collaborative filtering sites are websites that allow multiple users to tag or


classify and crowdsource information to create a user-based, bottom up, folksonomy (a


user generated, unstandardized, taxonomy). Today, a collaborative filtering feature can

be found in most blogs (e.g., to classify blog posts into one or more subjects or themes),


microblogs (e.g., through the use of hashtags), wikis (e.g., to find related articles), and


media sharing sites (e.g., to find similar pictures or videos). Content tags are used to

facilitate information filtering and when combined with a semantic algorithm, which


prevents typos from being incorporated into the folksonomy as a new classification


term, are powerful data curating tools. Three prominent collaborative filtering sites are

Delicious, Digg, and Connotea. [100]


       Digg is a social news site, which allows registered users to give a “thumbs up or


down” on a news story. By doing so, articles are pushed up or down on the site’s landing

page, allowing readers access to the “best” content as voted by the community. Users


also have a comment and follow feature, allowing them to access other user’s views and


subject interests. Moreover, Digg also integrates a number of APIs, such as Facebook

Connect, allowing users to share articles and their views on them to other social media


sites. In healthcare, Digg can be particularly useful to policymakers and hospital


administrators who wish to get information on the latest outbreaks and health-related

news in their local community, as the site allows access to the “highest regarded


sources” as voted by the Digg user community.






                                                                                       52
       ‘Delicious’ is a social bookmarking service, which allows users to store, share,

and discover web bookmarks. Its primary allure is a user-chosen tagging system, which


allows people quickly to filter through large amounts of bookmarks in a short period of


time. Also, due to its web-based nature, users can access their bookmarks from any

computer with Internet access. Other features include public and private bookmarks,


groups, and similar and popular link suggestions, which allow for collaboration. In


medicine and health(care), Delicious can be used to create high quality collaborative

knowledge repositories (e.g., with resources from WHO, CDC, Health Canada, etc) that


are centered around a particular topic (e.g., a treatment) and can be easily accessed


and by a select (or open) group of people (e.g., a hospital department).

       Connotea is a free online reference management site for clinicians and scientists.


It allows users to share and organize their references and receive updates as to what


colleagues are reading and adding in their reference libraries. [101]

       Unfortunately alexa.com, the popular web traffic rating site, shows that despite


collaborative filtering sites’ usefulness, they are losing popularity and market-share in


attracting new and maintaining old users due to the rising integration of a tagging

feature in other social networking sites.


Media Sharing Sites


       Media sharing sites comprise a large palette of social media tools that are

optimized for viewing, sharing, and embedding digital media on other web services;









                                                                                       53
                                                                               15
they share a large number of attributes with other social media – profiles , friends,

comments, and private messaging/sharing of content – but their success is determined


by the type content uploaded and shared. Views are often not necessarily related to the


quality of the media or its accuracy, as viral content sharing may be erroneous or have

poor resolution. Most often, a site’s catchy title [102], amusement level (e.g., a baby


panda sneezing and the mother panda being scared by the baby) [103], or relevance to


current affairs is what affects its ‘virality.’ [104]


       Media sharing sites, nevertheless, are great resources for knowledge translation

(e.g., the Ken Jong CPR video), community building (e.g., multiple sclerosis patient-to-


patient videos), marketing (e.g., Viagra commercials and information pamphlets),


research (e.g., video explaining patient rights), education (e.g., medical skill

demonstration videos and summary sheers), and branding (e.g., Mayo clinic patient


playing piano video). They are also easy to use, have no cost (for non-premium


accounts), and are accessible from both desktop and mobile devices. Table 2.8

illustrates the different types of media sharing sites, a common example, and their


description.














15 A profile page in a media sharing sites is often referred to as a channel; however

individuals and organizations may have more than one channel, as a way to organize
content around a theme (e.g., Tuberculosis vs. Diabetes).


                                                                                       54
Table 2.8: Types and descriptions of different media sharing sites
   Media
 Sharing Site    Example                            Description

  Category
                             Video sharing site where users can upload, view, share
    Video        YouTube     and comment an unlimited number of videos in both
   sharing
                             analog and high definition resolutions.
    Photo                    Image and video hosting site with an online community
   Sharing        Flickr     centred on its users and the theme of uploaded photos.

Presentation    SlideShare   Slide sharing site where users can upload presentations in
   Sharing                   MS PowerPoint, Keynote, Open Office, and .pdf formats.
                             Document sharing site where users can upload different
 Document
   sharing        Scribd     types of document, presentation, and spreadsheet
                             formats.
                             MySpace was the largest social networking site until 2008;

    Music                    however, today MySpace is primarily used as a niche
                 MySpace     media-sharing site for musicians and emerging artists,
   Sharing                   which allows them to upload and sell single music tracks

                             and entire albums in MP3 format.
                             A podcasting service provided through the Apple Corp.

                             iTunes Store which grants free and paid access to
  Education                  educational documents, audio, and video. Content is
   Sharing       ITunesU     multidisciplinary and available from kindergarten all the

                             way through university; it includes course lessons,
                             lectures, labs, and lab demonstrations.
  Video and                  A web and mobile platform that allows physicians to share

  Images in      Medting     medical images and build clinical cases to foster inter and
  Medicine                   intra institutional collaboration.
                             Medical video site that offers free CME, medical news, and
   Theme       The Doctors
   Specific      Channel     physician education videos from experts in over 50
                             specialties.


       A number of articles have been published on the use of media sharing sites;

these primarily focus on the use of audio and video podcasts 16for health professional


education, patient-to-patient communication, and public health campaigns.





16A podcast is an audio or video recording of episodic nature that can be subscribed to,

syndicated, and downloaded via the web or through a digital media store, such as
iTunes. Podcasts can be played in mp3 players and iPods.


                                                                                   55
       Within the patient-to-patient communication realm, Fernandez-Luque and

colleagues (2009) evaluated the comments from a random sample of YouTube videos


created by patients with Multiple Sclerosis. [105] They found that virtual communities


emerged through the “comment” feature of the site, with patients responding to each

other’s videos, documenting the progression of their disease, and endorsing certain


medications that should be used as a last resort for the treatment of a disease (e.g.,


Tysabri). Of concern was the interaction with patients directly with the pharmaceutical


industry, requesting patients to contact companies to become champions and public

advocates for particular medications.


       Similar research by Keelan and colleagues at the University of Toronto featured a


characterization of available immunization information in YouTube. [106] They found

that the most commonly discussed vaccine topic was childhood vaccines (accounting for


25% of the total vaccine videos) with the most specific vaccine topic being HPV. Overall,


negative videos (e.g., those that contradicted the Canadian Immunization Guide) were

more likely to receive a higher number of views and user ratings, and accounted for


approximately 50% of total YouTube immunization videos.    17


       Media sharing sites have also become encyclopedic resources. Among the most


notable are the Khan Academy, which hosts over three thousand videos and practice

exercises in everything from algebra to medicine and healthcare; the Doctors’ Channel,


which hosts online videos for a variety of healthcare professionals featuring content



17 YouTube does not discriminate video ranking based on content unless the video

violates copyright policy (in which case, it is removed). Generally, the number of times a
video is viewed is the main driver behind search result rankings.


                                                                                       56
about   continuing   medical   education,   medical   news,   and   healthcare-related

entertainments.


       Negative effects from media sharing sites have also been reported [105]. In


YouTube, copyright infringements are common. Today however, copyright owners can

opt in to receive a share of advertisement revenue to keep the content online. Also, few


child protection initiatives have been implemented on these services. For example, if


one types “proana” and “thinspiration” on YouTube, over twenty seven thousand

collective videos can be recalled. These can lead individuals to cause self harm by


providing information on how to support anorexia and bulimia, as well as finding other


equally ill individuals who become supporters in maintaining a disease-prone lifestyle.

       Finally, it should be noted that not all content available on media sharing sites is


available to anyone with an Internet connection; some countries block their access to


these sites (e.g., China). Notwithstanding, it is also important to consider that the high

prevalence of mobile phones has broken the capture and upload barrier for these sites,


which means that if an organization or individual is not constantly monitoring their


online presence, it is simple for an individual to take a video of themselves complaining

about the care they have received and upload it onto the web, damaging an individual


or a hospitals online reputation very quickly and with very little relative effort.


MUVEs and Other Social Media

       Although a large number of social media sites and functionalities are likely to


continue emerging, the only remaining category of social media which have not yet


been discussed are Massively Multiplayer Online Games (MMOG), more recently



                                                                                    57
branded as Multi-User Virtual Environments (MUVE). These 3-dimensional ecosystems

are analogous to a mashup of video games and wikis, which allow users to interact with


each other through a virtual representation of themselves known as an Avatar. Figure


2.6 displays an avatar inside a virtual operating room in Second Life.

   Figure 2.6: An avatar inside a virtual operating room in Second Life























       MUVEs can be classified in two general categories: general purpose and


healthcare specific. The most prevalent general purpose MUVE is Linen Lab’s Second


Life, which can be used for gaming or healthcare education with equal ease. Healthcare

specific MUVEs are less common, typically focusing on particular activities such as


medical education (e.g., CliniSpace), simulation (e.g. OpenSim), and psychiatric


treatment (e.g., InWorldSolutions). A large body of research exists on the use of MUVEs

and is summarized below, particularly focusing on SecondLife.


       Historically, MUVEs evolved from early role-playing games. These were text-


based and played by multiple users through networked computers; however, computer



                                                                                     58
graphics today allow live rendering that “feels” quite life-like. Also, MUVEs are

programmed to simulate many aspects of “real life” that are possible in 3 dimensions.


Thus, when two avatars walk closer together, the computer’s user will experience the


opposite character’s voice getting increasingly louder, as it happens in real life. This

effect is also mimicked graphically; that is, other avatars (and their surroundings) are


rendered with increasing sharpness and become more life-like in their interactions as


they become closer together.


       Some special-purpose MUVEs can even integrate the use of external sensors

(e.g., built in webcams in laptop computers) to replicate the user’s emotions on their


avatars (e.g. smiling) [107] and experiments are already underway to incorporate scent,

                                                                        18
temperature, robotics, and even remote-controlled haptic devices.           These extra

gadgets have the goal of expanding current MUVE capabilities to add a “fourth


dimension” (4D). [108]


       Evidence for the use of MUVEs in medicine is growing rapidly with applications

in, e.g., health care [109] and patient education [110], epidemiology [111] mass


prophylaxis simulation [112], psychotherapy [113], and research [114].


       A paper by Margaret Hansen at the University of San Francisco [115] has


summarized the major strengths and weaknesses of these environments, which are

applicable to both general purpose and healthcare specific MUVEs. Their strengths lie


the in their ability to be accessed from the comfort of a user’s own home at any time,



18Haptic devices give real-time feedback that can be felt, through the sense of touch;

for example, a haptic intra venous cannula will decrease resistance once the bevel of the
needle is in the “vein” on the screen.


                                                                                      59
their pedagogical flexibility allowing users and content creators with knowledge of the

Linden Scripting Language to design and construct a unique environment that mimics


“real world” architecture. Their dynamic nature also supports collaboration at a


distance, analogously to telemedicine. This is not without cost however, as the technical

barrier to entry in terms of usability often prevents and frustrates most users of these


tools (e.g., users have a hard time manipulating the avatar on the system and


teleporting it to a virtual hospital). Other weaknesses of MUVEs also include the large

amount of time required to build a 3D rendering of a physical place and the low


efficiency associated with sharing text, images, and videos to an avatar, when compared


with standard web browser-based interfaces of other social media. Finally, the fact that

MUVEs are often perceived as computer games, rather than serious clinical and social


environments, can also affect their adoption within healthcare institutions.


       Beard and colleagues also conducted research that surveyed health-related

activities on Second Life [116]; they found sixty-eight health-related locations, which are


summarized in Table 2.9, along with their description. Other notable findings of this


paper include the fact that research has demonstrated that using MUVEs can have real-

life behavior implications. Indeed, this is the premise behind US CDC education center


on Second Life, which aims to engage visitor to influence real-life health decision


making.











                                                                                     60
Table 2.9: A summary of iconic health-related spaces in Second Life
  Category         Site Name                           Description
                                    A site run by librarians and medical experts that
Education &
 Awareness      Health Info Island  offers education, awareness and access to a
                                    variety of health information resources.
                                    A genomics educational facility with 3D tutorials,

                   Gene Poole       videos, and other resources on chromosomes,
                                    DNA,     RNA,    laboratory    techniques,    and
                                    chromosomes.

                     Virtual        This walking hallucinations lab educates people
                                    about    the   abnormalities    of   living  with
                Hallucinations Lab  Schizophrenia.

               Virtual Ability Island virtual island which provides a place for social
                                    support and education about disabilities.
 Training &      Imperial College   This training hospital features a series of wards

 Simulation          London         and patient simulation cases.
                                    Emergency     preparedness    training.   Teaches

                   Play2Train       physicians how to manage patients and drug doses
                                    in emergency situations.
                                    The Heart Murmur Simulator allows people to

                  RL Education      auscultate   virtually and   learn  normal    and
                                    abnormal heart sounds.
                                    The Virtual Relay for Life is a fundraising event,
                American Cancer
 Marketing           Society        which aims to sensitize people about cancer &
                                    cancer research.
                                    This   virtual hospital  simulates   the  patient
                  Palomar West
                    Hospital        experience and state of the art technologies used
                                    at Palomar West Hospital in Escondido, California.
                                    An organization focused on changing the culture

                   FasterCures      of medical research, it provides information about
                                    clinical trials and new treatments.
                                    This is a University of Houston site, which pays
                Human Health &
  Research      Performance Lab     people to fill out surveys, participate in research &
                                    others studies.


                                     DISCUSSION

       This synthesis of results has yielded a number of issues, challenges and drivers


for and against the adoption of social media in medicine and health(care). These are







                                                                                   61
summarized under the following three subheadings: ethics, professionalism, privacy,

and confidentiality; information quality; and unanswered questions.


Ethics, Professionalism, Privacy, and Confidentiality


       The potential violation of ethical standards, patient privacy, confidentiality, and

professional Codes of Practice, along with the misrepresentation of information, are the


most common contributors to individual and institutional fear against the use of social


media in medicine and healthcare.

       Equally important but less well understood is the notion of how these issues vary


according to geographical and cultural norms, and how clinicians may protect


themselves during internet-based interactions. A simple example of this is the

Tweetsprekuur Dutch primary care consultation service on Twitter, which is considered


to be an unethical use of technology by most professional bodies in North America (e.g.,


the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons) who discourage or prohibit the use of

social media for patient-clinician interactions altogether. [51] [117]


       More specifically, there are varied philosophical views by professional bodies


both supporting and condoning the use of social media. If this was not nebulous

enough, these contradictions are further perplexed by regional (e.g., health authority)


and institutional (e.g., Hospital) variations in policy. Fundamentally however, it can be


said that the fear of the unknown is a major barrier against the adoption of social media

in clinical settings. This “unknown” is likely due to the conservative nature of healthcare


institutions and practitioners, a lack of understanding of the true risks and liabilities that


could result, as well as the question of whose recommendations and best practices



                                                                                       62
should be followed (e.g., the CMA [118] supports the conservative use of social media

while the BMA [117] and AMA [51] condone it).


       Despite this uncertainty, Hrynaszkiewicz and colleagues [119] recommend that if


information is posted publicly, it should not include patient identifiers (e.g., patient

names, insurance numbers, photos) without written consent. However, if permission is


not obtained, clinicians can remain on solid ethical grounds by disclosing up to a


maximum of three indirect patient identifiers (e.g., sex, disease, treatment).

       In general, there is a trend in the literature that recommends all clinicians to


ignore patient requests sent through social media. [117] This is important because one


could argue that, by not responding to these requests, clinicians are committing an Act

of Omission, as there would be implied consent to respond through the medium given


that the patient started the dialogue on social media (e.g., Twitter).


       In terms of social media policies, socialmediagovernance.com [120] is the most

comprehensive public database of institutional policies on the subject. As of June 2012,


this resource included 194 social media policies, of which, 21 were from healthcare


institutions, including big stakeholders like the Mayo Clinic, Kaiser Permanente, and

Roche. In 2010, research by Kind and colleagues [121] evaluated all US accredited


medical schools (n=132) for their social media presence. They found that although 95%


(n=126) of American Medical Schools had a Facebook presence only 13 had social media

policies and only 7 of those encouraged the thoughtful and responsible use of social


media.






                                                                                      63
       Research has shown [42] [122] that the numbers of privacy and confidentiality

violations committed by physicians who use social media are relatively minimal. For


example, Thompson and colleagues at the University of Florida [42] evaluated 1023


student and medical residents Facebook profiles in 2007 and 2009. They found that

medical students were more likely than residents to violate privacy; however the only


privacy violations that were found were photos of medical mission trips where clinicians


were interacting with patients. Even then, out of the thousand plus profiles evaluated


only 12 ethical violations were found, which accounted for less than 2% of physician

profiles. Similar research using content analysis was also conducted with self-identified


physicians on Twitter by Katherine Chretien [122], who found that out of 314 physicians,


each with more than 500 followers only 3% of their total tweets could be considered

unprofessional and 0.7% of them represented potential privacy violations.


Information Quality


       The notion of health-related information quality has been a heated topic of

discussion since the mid 1990s when Internet became accessible to the public. Of


concern are not only child protection and anti-pornography initiatives but also quackery


and e-pharmacies, which often use social media for direct to consumer advertising

      19
(DTC).   [19] Equally important are questions of identity theft, misrepresentation of

identity (e.g., a charlatan claiming to be a Medical Doctor) and the validity of


information that is provided within and through social media.


19Although DTC is only legal in the United States and New Zealand, pharmaceutical DTC
practices reach the majority of web consumers due to the technical architecture of the

World Wide Web, which makes it nearly impossible to block social media interactions
across (arbitrary) geographical boundaries.


                                                                                       64
        To establish the validity of the information provided, clinicians who use social

media use one or more of the following tactics. First, they take pictures of themselves in


a clinical environment and upload them publicly using a service such as Flikr or Picassa,


so that any user with access to the internet can see them. Second, they complete a

(public) professional networking site profile, such as Linked In, which denotes the


location and year of their medical training, professional connections and affiliations, and


other credentials or interests. (It is important to remember that professional

connections or “friendships” on Professional Networking Sites rightly or wrongly give a


sense of validation from third parties.) Third, they apply to and are congruent with one


or more information quality policy consortiums such as the Healthcare Blogger Code of

Ethics (MedBloggerCode) [123] or the Health On the Net (HON) [124] Foundation’s


information quality initiative, which allow people to display a digital “ribbon” on their


websites with a link to a third party site which verifies compliance with their principles

of information quality.


       The principles of information quality, as agreed by HON and MedBlooggerCode


are questionable, because inaccurate and false information is difficult to monitor and

police; nevertheless, they should be noted as these principles have been in existence for


over a decade. “Verified” websites displaying approval ribbons must voluntarily provide


the following information: 1) [professional] perspective (e.g., Is the blogger a

cardiologist or a cardiac surgeon?); 2) confidentiality (e.g., Is patient privacy being


protected?); 3) conflicts of interest (e.g., Is the writer being paid by the pharmaceutical


industry?); 4) reliability (e.g., Are there citations to peer-reviewed material?); 5)



                                                                                       65
courtesy (e.g., Is third party content attributed?); 6) purpose (e.g., Is the purpose of the

site clearly stated?); 7) justification of claims (e.g., What is the level of evidence behind


the information provided?); and 8) contact information (e.g., Are the contact details of


the article author and website publisher accurate?). [123-124]

       In contrast, clinicians who use social media anonymously typically use the quality


of their content and the minute details provided in their rants to prove the validity of


their claims and (to a point) credentials. The most famous case of anonymous blogging

is that of Dr. Flea [125] which is discussed in Chapter 3.


       At the time of this study, at the World Health Organization headquarters in


Geneva, Switzerland, Dr. Joan Dzenowagis is leading a request to the Internet

Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN), which manages all domain


names on the Internet, for a new specific .health domain. The acquisition of this domain


would be strictly legislated and monitored according to quality criteria, such as those

noted above, and later prioritized by a consortium of industry partners (e.g., Google) to


come up as the first search results when people look for health-related information.


[126] Theoretically, this would improve consumer confidence with regard to the quality

information from the get go and improve information trust as a whole because one


could validate content from social media sites directly from their web address. However,


whether this initiative will happen is a political issue that requires the support of at least

99 of 198 Member States at the World Health Assembly (WHO’s Governing Body) and


will likely not be resolved in the near future.






                                                                                       66
       Validated information sites have also existed since the dawn of the Internet. In

social media, wikis like Medpedia (a Harvard, Stanford, University of Michigan and UC


Berkley initiative), which verify author’s credentials before allowing them to generate


content, have tried to improve information quality and “validity.” However, when the

majority of articles by these “author verified” sources are compared with open


initiatives like Wikipedia, they tend to be shorter, of equal or less quality, and have


fewer references due to the restriction of users that can add and democratize the

amount of content available on the Internet [127-128].


Unanswered Questions


       Developing an appropriate Standard of Care involving digital interactions,

particularly those over social web tools are likely to remain a misty ether of agreements


due to the range of philosophical, cultural, social, and political values that can be found


in the health sector. Professional standards, outlining whether to separate or merge

clinical and personal identities are a reoccurring issue, as health providers have different


levels of digital literacy and educational credentials (e.g., Should nurses have different


digital interaction standards from physicians?). [129] For example, while some

professionals may deem it acceptable to use one Facebook profile for both work and


personal purposes, by using due diligence and monitoring their privacy settings carefully


(e.g., with whom they share specific information; patients vs. close friends), others may

lack the technical knowledge necessary to separate their personal and professional life


and may have more than one profile or will avoid interactions with current and former


patients altogether. [19]



                                                                                       67
       There is also a question of whether legal frameworks from telemedicine can or

should be adapted to social media. In telemedicine, for example, the standard practice


is for clinicians to be licensed in the location where the patient is receiving treatment.


[130] However, the Internet transcends geographical boundaries making it nearly

impossible to follow the same precedent. Even so, if the patient discloses their address


of residence but is physically in a different geographical location when receiving


treatment, it is debatable whether this principle should be maintained.

       Other issues that need to be addressed, in terms of liability and malpractice, is


whether a health care provider, layman, or digital platform should be held liable for


health-related recommendations provided through social media. [19] The articulation of

policies that are adaptive to the rate of newly evolving social technologies will also


continue to be a challenge for decision makers. At the core, is the question of whether


professional organizations (e.g., the Royal College of Physicians of Canada) would prefer

to monitor and enforce every digital interaction or whether they will grant the


discretion necessary for their members to exercise their professional judgment and due


diligence and only undertake an investigation when they receive a complaint.

       Furthermore, there is a need for an urgent evaluation of policies by key actors


(e.g., Public Health Agency of Canada, the Canadian Medical Association, Provincial


Ministries of Health, etc.) that are responsible for safeguarding computer-mediated

communication in healthcare. Should, for example, standardization and verification of


medical licensing be implemented on the web? If so, it would need to be


operationalized in such a way that provincial colleges of physicians, nurses, and other



                                                                                      68
care providers can link to a database or web-ribbon to prove their licensed clinician

status. Ensuring the highest possible safety and effectiveness of digital interactions is a


mutual responsibility of industry, professional associations, and government; however


no hierarchy of responsibility and accountability presently exists and the gaps in policies

must be harmonized through a multi-stakeholder meeting or clinicians will continue to


operate in a conflicting policy environment which may ultimately lead to legal action as


a result of their social media use.

        Governments also need to identify what business models are appropriate in the


health sector. For example, is it appropriate to sell patient information? Traditionally, it


has, so long as the patient is informed of the transaction and the data are anonymized.

However, given that users seldom read the Terms of Service when signing up for a social


tool and that they are not allowed to modify them, an ethical question remains about


whether they are being de facto coerced to give their data away when joining a specific

service. This issue is further complicated by the notion that interacting through social


media is an increasing social expectation. [131]


        An additional issue is that few web companies and social media service providers

are fully transparent, from the moment a user signs up for a social service, as to how


they will use a user’s data. Even if they are transparent in how they will use the data,


the Terms of Service, which are legal binding documents, often change without the end

user having any say in the matter or even being aware of the changes. It is important to


consider whether or not users and industry would be willing to open a pay-for-privacy


business model, which could potentially allow social media to become an ecosystem for



                                                                                         69
safe and secure digital interactions in healthcare by allowing clinicians and patients to

use services they already use (e.g., Facebook) for a safe and ethical healthcare-related


encounter. Alternatively, the question of whether governments should institute a legal


requirement for user privacy in these sites will be important to ponder in the future, as

secure messaging platforms in the healthcare space are expensive and even sometimes


even subject to privacy and confidentiality breeches themselves. [132]


        To date no longitudinal evaluations of the full economic effects of social media,


both with regard to health care and in other domains, have been conducted. Though

this is due to the novel nature of social media, such evaluations would help determine


the appropriate incentives (e.g., CME vs. money), who should provide them, the return


on investment, total cost of ownership, scalability, and long-term financial feasibility of

using social media. [133]


        Other theoretical and pragmatic questions must also be addressed; these include


(but are not limited to: 1) Will Wikipedia and other medical wikis which use

crowdsourcing and open structures of community-regulated validation become more


powerful and sustainable than UpToDate-like resources that have traditionally used a


small (paid) group of individuals to create clinical information summaries? (If so, what


are the ethical and legal responsibilities of the Wikipedia-like actors towards health

consumers?); 2) How biased are social media in providing medical information to users

                                               20
and is it leading to near-infinite segregation    of users around a specific belief (e.g.,



20Near-infinite segregation can be conceptually understood as the idea that the internet

can provide nearly limitless data storage and socialization spaces for people with
deviant behavior (e.g., quacks) to maintain their practices, interact with like-minded


                                                                                        70
quackery); 3) What are the sociocultural, ecologic, and architectural considerations that

must be contemplated over the next decade in the use of social technologies in


healthcare?


Limitations

       This study has a number of limitations. First, results were limited to the English


language. Second, during the environmental scans and grey literature queries


snowballing was used, which is subject to friendly and frequent author bias. Third, due

to the complexity of the data synthesis process, there was a three-month lag between


the data collection and the completion of this manuscript (despite efforts to monitor


new applications and tools during this time, it is possible that I may have missed new

developments during this time period). Finally, there was a high-reliance on self-


reported data from blogs and primary users, which opens the possibility to incorrect,


fabricated, or invalid data.

                                CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS


       This research has demonstrated that clinicians may use social media as part of


their professional duties in health service delivery. Thus, the following four guidelines

may be used to mitigate risk during such interactions.


Principle 1: Maintain professionalism at all times: Clinicians must remember and follow


their institution’s and professional association’s social media guidelines in all digital

interactions. If such bodies have not yet created a policy on the use of social media,


clinicians must assume that all information exchanged is public and posted in a medium


individuals and promote their practices without being confronted by an a recognized
authority (e.g., Health Canada). [134]


                                                                                       71
no different than a newspaper. If in doubt about whether the information to be posted

is appropriate, it should not be posted. It is also essential to remember that just because


a message is private (e.g., a direct message on Twitter or Facebook) this does not mean


that the information being exchanged is secure and protected. Clinicians and

organizations may also use disclaimers to note that the information provided through


social media does not indicate any form of endorsement or validation by third parties;


and that all views expressed are solely those of the author and not those of the

institution that the clinician is affiliated with. Indeed, although disclaimers in general


have no legal weight in court [107], they do inform the public of separate personal and


institutional identities.

Principle 2: Be authentic, have fun and do not be afraid: the only way to create


meaningful relationships over social media is to be genuine. Clinicians should not be


afraid to be themselves, so long as they keep in mind Principle 1 and remember the

public nature of social media, as well as who their audience is.


Principle 3: Ask for help: People who use social media are very enthusiastic about new


members joining their community; thus, clinicians should look for people with similar

interests, both professional and personal, and ask for help. Attention to detail should


also be placed on how people interact (e.g., netiquette) and mimic the social media


service and community’s practices (so long as they are professional).

Principle 4: Focus, grab attention, engage, and take action: One of the most useful


models for the successful engagement of an online audience with social media is the


Dragonfly Model [135]. By using the analogy of a dragonfly which needs all four wings



                                                                                       72
to work in concert, equally this model uses the following principles: 1) focus (e.g.,

identify a single, concrete, and measurable goal for using social media); 2) grab


attention (e.g., make others look at content by saying or posting something interesting);


3) engage (e.g., foster personal connections by discussing your interests with like-

minded people); and 4) take action (e.g., enable and empower others).


                                     CONCLUSION


       The role of social media in the healthcare sector is far-reaching and this article

has discussed which, what, where, how and why different social media are used in a


spectrum of healthcare-related settings. Questions and debates in terms of governing


social media and applying it to medicine and healthcare are likely to remain contentious.

       Although research has shown that few physicians who use social media violate


privacy and confidentiality standards, it is unclear as to whether it is appropriate to


delegate discretion to the physician and allow him or her to decide if social media is

appropriate in specific medical contexts; indeed, this is the case in the Netherlands with


the primary care Twitter consultation service @tweetspreekuur, where Dutch


telemedicine policies allow physicians to make the call of whether a particular

technology is appropriate for patient care. Understanding which actor or actors are


responsible and liable, as well as how ethics, confidentiality, privacy, and information


quality should be managed will remain central issue that must be resolved in the coming

years.


       The four guidelines provided herein provide a starting point for healthcare


professionals who wish to use social media in a safe and ethical manner. However,



                                                                                     73
much work remains to be done in understanding the pertinence of social media in pubic

care when contrasted with their use in private systems where social media is principally


used as a marketing technique to supplement concierge-medicine. Finally, more


research will allow us to understand the synergies between social media and evidence-

based practice, ultimately allowing for evidence-based policies and economic analyses


on the return of investment of using social media.














































                                                                                     74
CHAPTER 3


    A Selection of Recent Judicial and Administrative Case Studies that
 Emerged from the Adoption of Social Media in Medicine and Healthcare



                                 INTRODUCTION


In the previous chapter I reviewed the literature regarding the where, how and why

social media have been adopted in a variety of medical and health(care) contexts.


However, there is no question that legal and ethical issues also emerged during the

adoption process. Indeed, many stakeholders today not only fear the implications that


could result from the use and adoption of social technologies, but they are also highly

skeptical and unaware of the administrative and judicial processes that could follow

when social media are misused.


       Questions including: “How can social media affect physicians during a

malpractice lawsuit?” “How should academic institutions respond to students who


violate patient confidentiality?” “Should physicians interact with their patients through

social media?” illustrate the many actors and controversies faced by clinicians, patients


and the public alike. Indeed, it is the objective of this chapter to use case studies to

explore these questions.


       The first case study is entitled Dr. Flea; it will review a famous malpractice

lawsuit of an anonymous pediatrician blogger. The second case study is entitled


Facebook in Nursing Practice; it explores a nursing student who was dismissed from

Johnson Community College for uploading the picture of a placenta and umbilical cord





                                                                              75
during a maternity placement. The third and last case study is entitled Friend or Foe; it

discusses the case of a physician and a patient who were “friends” on Facebook and had


to stop their virtual relationship (e.g., their Facebook friendship status) due to hospital


policy.

       Since these cases were all in the public domain, it is important to understand the


background story, what has happened, how institutions have reacted, and how the


issues were dealt with. Indeed, these examples are real-life illustrations that have been

discussed in both social and traditional media (e.g., print and TV) and have created a


great deal of public interest, anxiety, as well as a potential legal precedent.


Case Study 1: Dr Flea

       Pediatric Pulmonologist Dr. Robert Lindeman was a world-renowned anonymous


medical blogger and, conjointly, the winner of the 2006 Medical Weblog Awards. His


Blog, “Flea”, covered topics from childhood obesity to anti-vaccination perspectives. In

an interview [26], Lindeman noted that he blogged anonymously because “there were


things that [he] could not say publicly because [he] was a doctor [and] his colleagues


would judge him.” These included things like malpractice and the “sorry state” of his

subspecialty. Unfortunately however, his blogging led to the most notorious settlement


due to medical blogging known to date.


       In 2002 Dr. Lindeman had a patient who suddenly and unexpectedly died from

complications of diabetes. The mother of the deceased decided to sue Dr. Lindeman for


wrongful care. After consulting with his malpractice insurance, the matter went to trial,






                                                                                       76
as Dr. Lindeman, his attorney, and the insurance company believed no malpractice


occurred.

        During the trial Dr. Lindeman decided to provide a play-by-play summary of what


happened under his nom de plume “Flea”, a blog he had been running for a number of


years prior to the court case, anonymously. Inappropriate details, including the

videotaped preparation sessions with his attorney and the coaching process of how to


answer questions in a manner appealing to the jury were discussed in his blog. Flea also


noted which clinical materials his attorney had told him to read [[136], that the judge


was “dozing” during the trial, and that Dr. Lindeman himself was a “cocky bastard.” [43]

        Half way through the trial a colleague of the plaintiff’s attorney, who read


medical blogs, came across Flea’s blog and informed the plaintiff. The next day, while on


the stand, Dr. Lindeman was asked if he was Flea, which resulted in a substantial


financial settlement with the plaintiff due to “prior inconsistent statements.” (This is

basically a legal term noting that Flea’s account on the blog and his testaments in court


were contradictory.) That day, the Dr. Flea blog was taken offline and since, Dr.


Lindeman has never blogged again. Despite this however, the story was on the front


page of the Boston Globe the next day resulting in numerous social and professional

consequences.  21


Case Study 2: Facebook in Nursing Practice

                                          th
        Doyle Byrnes was a 22 year old 4 year nursing student at Johnson Community


College [137] when, during one of her placements at Olathe Medical Center’s maternity


21
  These consequences are presented in the discussion section.


                                                                                        77
ward, she asked one of her nursing instructors if she could take a picture of a patients’

placenta and umbilical cord. Doyle was excited and wanted to share the excitement


with her family and friends. The instructor replied 'oh you girls', so she proceeded to


take the picture and post it on Facebook (Figure 3.1 [138]). Three hours later, the

instructor called Doyle and asked her to take the picture off the social media site. Doyle


happily complied. Asking the instructor if she was in trouble, the instructor replied that


she was not. In fear of being reprimanded, Doyle also closed her Facebook account.

Despite this however, the next day Doyle was dismissed from nursing school with a


letter from Jeanne Walsh, director of nursing at the college, noting: “Your demeanor


and lack of professional behavior surrounding this event was considered a disruption to

the learning environment and did not exemplify the professional behavior that we


expect in the nursing program.”


                      Figure 3.1: Doyle Byrnes’ Facebook Picture



























                                                                                      78
        A few months later, the Doyles sued the school and the case went to court. In


particular, Clifford Cohen, Doyles’ attorney noted that the Johnson Community College’s

Code of Conduct did not address photographs or social media. A federal judge noted


that the school had no right in dismissing the student, and ordered the school to issue a


reprimand and reinstate Doyle into the nursing program. Doyle completed her degree

and moved states to look for a job in nursing. It is unknown if she was able to find a job


due to her inappropriate use of Facebook.

                            22
Case Study 3: Friend or Foe


        I am a patient, researcher, and healthcare professional. I have worked with the

World Health Organization and the World Bank as an “expert” in social media. I believe


that we can use social media to humanize medicine and empower patients. Recently, I


was shocked to receive an email from my physician. He had to “unfriend” me from


Facebook because of a new hospital policy.

        Last May, the British Medical Association (BMA) issued a statement condemning


patient relationships on Facebook. Their rationale is that social technologies “increase


the potential of clinical exploitation” because a physician may gain access to information


that was not disclosed during a clinical encounter. [117]

        At the core of this issue is defining professional boundaries on digital spaces and,


as a corollary, our expectations of privacy. My doc and I, whom I haven’t named to


protect his identity, had a mutual agreement. Our “friendship” outside the clinical space




22
  This case study was published under the Creative Commons Public License in the
Journal of Participatory Medicine on August of 2011. [139]


                                                                                         79
would serve, in our view, to complement rapport, and the Facebook platform was not to

be used for medical purposes.


       At last, I had found a positively deviant doctor. He put patients first.


       It took less than two months for the system condemn our behavior. (The BMA

policy was adopted by my physicians’ hospital, reprimanding all physician-patient


contact on social media.)


       I fully supported and understood my doctor “unfriending” me. However, when

are we going to protect those doctors who want to go above and beyond the standard


of care? Perhaps in the future the BMA will not sanction our connection through a


Google + circle, which allows physicians to separate personal and professional

connections, but perhaps the system will never change and will only see risk when they


hear the words “social media”.


                                      DISCUSSION

       These three cases exemplify the difficulties patients and clinicians face when


setting boundaries on digital spaces; they also illustrate the institutional and public


repercussions that may result when personal boundaries are evaluated through an

institutional and organizational lens.


Anonymous Blogging


       The case of Dr. Flea exposes the risk and lack of anonymity that can be found on

the social web. Today, the medical blogging community condemns anonymous blogging,


yet a few prominent blogs of unknown authorship remain (e.g., Storytell ER Doc: A peek


behind the curtain [140]). Medical professionals who wish to blog must always evaluate



                                                                                     80
the risk vs. benefits of using social media. Common incentives for blogging can vary from

financial (e.g., remuneration by hospitals and other healthcare institutions on a by post


basis), to social (e.g., receiving respect from the medical community), or moral (e.g.,


creating a communication forum for patient-physician interaction) reasons.

       After the settlement, Dr. Flea was interviewed by the New York Personal Injury


Law Blog where he noted the following advice to medical bloggers [136]: 1) Every time


you post, recite the following to yourself as though it were a mantra: “I am cutting rope

with which to hang myself. I am cutting rope with which to hang myself” 2) Any time


you write anything, anywhere, recite the following to yourself as though it were a


mantra: “I am cutting rope with which to hang myself. I am cutting rope with which to

hang myself”; and 3) Don’t blog anonymously.”


       The response of the patients in Dr. Lindeman’s practice subsequent to the


lawsuit was also interesting, as Dr. Lineman described the segregation of patients in his

private practice into three groups [136]: fugitives, supporters, and everybody else. The


fugitives called as soon as they found out about the case and demanded that their


records be transferred to a different practice. The supporters called Dr. Lindeman to

express their support, they told him that they respected him and appreciated him being


their doctor. Finally, every body else was the third group, which includes everyone who


did not know about the case or what to think of the situation, resulting in never making

any mention of it. Despite this, some colleagues, once they found out Flea was Dr.


Lindeman, stopped speaking with him altogether; illustrating the ripple effect that


inappropriate medical blogging can have on a medical professional and his practice.



                                                                                       81
       The case was also widely discussed by the medical blogosphere. Dr. Ves Dimov,

an allergist and professor at the University of Chicago, provided a summarized account


of the event along with the following recommendations [141]: 1) write as if your boss


and your patients are reading your blog every day; 2) comply with Healthcare Insurance

Portability and Accountability Act or corresponding legal statute in your jurisdiction


(AKA Do not blog anonymously); 3) list your name and contact information; 4) if your


blog is work-related, it is probably better to let your employer know; and 4) use a

disclaimer, such as: "All opinions expressed here are those of their author(s) and not of


their employer. Information provided here is for medical education only. It is not


intended as and does not substitute for medical advice."

Posting Inappropriate Pictures


       The story Doyle Byrnes exemplifies the range of expectations for privacy,


confidentiality, and professionalism that vary with age, culture, and across healthcare

institutions. It raises an important question of whether or not the healthcare


establishment will be able to create policies that can keep up with the dynamic nature


of online environments.     For example, the question of whether a placenta is an

unequivocal patient identifier, bad taste or simply stupid is at the crux of the


ramifications that could follow if this case were to repeat itself.


       Although Byrnes’ case has received much attention in the media, it is unlikely

that this event is isolated. Different social media sites have different privacy settings,


many of which can be customized, but often change, many times without notice or time


for a user to adapt. [19] Indeed, it is difficult for institutions to know if a picture that



                                                                                      82
violates professional codes of conduct has been uploaded since “private” update

timelines are common and social media privacy site settings vary. [42]


       Should healthcare institutions police their employees for appropriate conduct?


Generally, a violation of patient privacy occurs when identifiable information is shared

with people outside the patients care circle [43] and although a patient picture is


considered a direct patient identifier, could one claim that a placenta is equally


identifiable? Drawing the line is an issue that must be addressed in all policies, and at

present, the horizon remains unclear as to what is inappropriate behavior, who should


sanction individuals, and who is responsible to monitor social media.


       The use of pictures is common in learning environments. Thus, one should

ponder what would have happened if a less publicly visible technology were used. Say


for instance, if Doyle Byrnes used a Polaroid camera and the picture was displayed at a


family member’s desk, would Johnson Community College and other academic

institutions consider the offence to be of equal or lesser magnitude?


       At present, there are no ethical frameworks in the peer-reviewed literature


addressing social media issues. Furthermore, it is also unclear, once a real violation of

patient privacy and confidentiality has occurred, how healthcare institutions should


respond when renewing or hiring new personnel who have committed these


“infractions”, given the lack of legal and related policies.

Digital Friends


       The unfriending case in Facebook illustrates the evolving understanding of


professional boundaries, as well as the present turf wars about who should govern



                                                                                     83
social media in clinical realms. This scenario is analogous to who should own the

electronic medical record (e.g., the patient, the government, or the physician) that is


still under debate. Clinicians wishing to augment the therapeutic relationship with


digital tools are subject to a number of codes of practice, ethics, and legal statutes -

most of them with conflicting perspectives. This contrast is illustrated in the social


media policies of the College of Physicians and Surgeons of British Columbia [142] and


those of the Canadian Medical Association. [118] Excerpts of these policies are displayed

in Tables 3.1 and 3.2, respectively.


Table 3.1: Royal College of Physicians of British Columbia Position on Social Media Use
The College proposes the following guidelines for physicians who participate in social

media and online networking forums:

    1. Do not initiate an invitation to patients or patients’ family members to be your

       online friends.
    2. Carefully consider an invitation from a patient to become an online friend. In
       general, avoid entering into dual relationships with patients by becoming online

       friends but be considerate of patients’ feelings when declining the invitation.
    3. Respect patients’ privacy by carefully managing information acquired about
       them from online sites or other sources. Consider whether it is medically

       necessary to view patients’ websites or online profiles and, if so, seek permission
       to access these sites. Do not enter collateral information about patients in your
       records without their knowledge.

    4. Exercise restraint when disclosing personal information on social media or online
       networking forums. Assume content on the Internet is public and accessible to
       all.

    5. Read, understand, and use the strictest privacy settings in order to maintain
       control over access to your personal information. Be aware that privacy settings
       are imperfect and can be compromised.

    6. Be mindful of your own Internet presence and be proactive in removing content,
       which may be viewed as unprofessional.
    7. Be aware of the potential for establishing online therapeutic relationships

       through medical advice and discussion posted to the Internet. Also be aware of
       the potential for breaching patient confidentiality by conveying medical
       information in anecdotal form in an Internet post.





                                                                                       84
Table 3.2: Excerpts from the CMA’s Rules of Engagement with Social Media
Background
 •  The reality is that individual doctors and medical organizations have to consciously

    decide if, why and how to use the various social media platforms.
 •  While use of social media could potentially increase the exposure of physicians to
    disciplinary and medico-legal issues, those physicians who choose to use social

    media can help shape how these tools can improve health care in the future.
Patient Confidentiality
 •  When using social media, physicians should endeavour to use the most stringent

    security and privacy settings available for the particular platform.
Professionalism

 •  Having an online profile or identifiable presence on social media can have the same
    degree of positive or negative impact on a physician's social reputation as being
    active in any other public venue. In fact, having access to a global audience can
    magnify this reputation.

 •  The most effective use of social media often involves communicating information
    that is both personal and professional. However, physicians must retain the

    appropriate boundaries of the patient-physician relationship when dealing with
    individual patients. The same standards of professionalism that would apply in face-
    to-face physician-patient interactions also apply in electronic interactions.

 •  If a physician is an employee of a health care institution or organization that has
    social media guidelines in place, he or she should review these and act accordingly.
Potential Benefits

 •  More frequent communication with patients and the public improves the quality of
    medical care and satisfaction with physician care. Social media can enhance the role
    of traditional media in delivering important public health messages.

 •  Use of social media can provide patients and the public with quicker and easier
    access to medical expertise, often in a way that is more current, clear and concise
    than traditional media sources.

 •  Posting (with copyright permission) evidence-based medical information on social
    media sites can improve the quality of health information made available to
    patients and the public.



       As it can be seen from Tables 3.1 and 3.2, the perspectives from the CMA and


the College of Physicians and Surgeons of British Columbia are conflicting. While the


College believes that physicians should avoid interactions with their patients on social

media sites, the CMA accepts that social media is a public space that can improve the


quality and satisfaction of medical care. At present, each provincial College of Physicians



                                                                                     85
and Surgeons is responsible for licensing medical practice and subspecialty, however if a

member is unaware of their provincial college policy and follows the CMA policy, should


they be considered to be at fault in the eyes of the public, when what they are doing is


in the best interest of the patient? Traditionally yes, but whether it is the best approach

is important to consider.


        Understanding if different technical platforms should be governed differently


and by which stakeholder is at the crux of social media governance. Traditionally, secure

messaging platforms like mydoctor.ca along with secure email platforms used by health


maintenance organizations (e.g., Kaiser Permanente) have been deemed appropriate for


patient-clinician communication though open social media platforms have not.

Perceiving whether there is an actual vs. a real threat to patient confidentiality is also an


issue of perspective, as it could be argued that if a patient contacts a clinician through a


social platform s/he is inherently giving permission for the clinician to respond through

that medium. Even so, research also shows that secure platforms can be subject to


privacy and confidentiality breaches despite robust security training and the compliance


of good information safeguarding practices, as it happened to Kaiser Permanente’s “KP

Online” platform, which during a server patch installation concatenated 800 email


messages and publicly revealed the confidential health information of a large number of


patients. [132]

        Nevertheless, institutions must consider whether instating policies that force


clinicians to ignore patient contact on social media are innately violating the principle of


patient autonomy and/or might cause an act of omission. For example, if a clinician



                                                                                        86
receives a suicidal ideation note on a social site, he has a legal duty to act and inform

the authorities. Yet, if this is considered a valid exception for action when interacting in


social media sites, what other exceptions are acceptable on these social digital spaces?


                                     CONCLUSION

       In conclusion, this chapter has presented a review of three recent judicial and


administrative cases that affected, both directly and indirectly, clinicians and institutions


that use social media. The question however remains in who should be responsible for

the governance of social media, and where should personal and professional boundaries


be drawn. Much research and work will need to be done before ethical and governance


frameworks can be harmonized across and between healthcare actors to ensure the

safe, ethical, and responsible use of social media in clinical environments and a positive


addition to the therapeutic patient relationship.






























                                                                                      87
CHAPTER 4

                                  Conclusions

       [Social Media] are like Pink Floyd lyrics; they mean different things, to

       different people depending on their state of mind – Kevin Maney

What We Know


       Social media are increasingly being adopted in medicine and healthcare.

Although their use is perceived to be risky by a large majority of healthcare


stakeholders, it has not stopped many clinicians and institutions from adopting and

implementing social media as a means to improve hospital efficiency, efficacy, equity,


visibility and improve the patient experience. However, comprehensive, high quality,

evidence on these implementations remains relatively scarce and it is primarily found in

the grey literature.


       The cases and applications reviewed suggest that social media has become and

will continue to be a major venue for computer-mediated communication in medicine


and health(care). Furthermore, this research has also demonstrated that patient

information privacy and confidentiality breeches on tools like Twitter and Facebook are


relatively uncommon.

       From an academic perspective, more work is required to document the


theoretical and conceptual frameworks that can be used to evaluate social media in

research and practice. Media studies, Medical Informatics, and Medicine 2.0 may be


used as a lens to operationalize research, but when combined with the critical-







                                                                              88
interpretivist approach are not often well accepted within the traditional positivistic

realm of evidence-based medicine.


       The question of who should govern the use and adoption of social media


remains nebulous in the world beyond academic discourse. Although policies on the use

of social media are being crafted and adopted by academic, healthcare, and professional


institutions, views are often conflicting across actors, and policy violations are difficult


to police due the vast differences in user knowledge on social media site privacy, as well

as the differing perception of what is appropriate and inappropriate behaviour.


       Identifying appropriate frameworks with which to guide the safe, ethical, and


appropriate use of social media in the healthcare space will be a challenge in the years

to come. Understanding how security, patient confidentiality and risk should be


mitigated and attenuated will be increasingly important as social media has evolved


much more quickly than policy can be created or adapted. Exploring, disseminating, and

translating “best practices” for both private and public healthcare institutions (and the


general public itself, as there are users with differing perspectives on this issues) will


allow further adoption and decrease institutional resistance to the continued adoption

of social media.


       To my knowledge, this is the first comprehensive synthesis of the evidence,


assumptions, conceptual and theoretical frameworks, and ethical and administrative

dilemmas that have been experienced in medicine and health(care) in adopting social


media. However, as stated in Chapter 1, the intent of this research was not to prove,


measure, or generalize; its intent was to use narrative and dialogue to question and



                                                                                       89
explain, to uncover, as well as to understand how different actors may use and enable

change through the use of social media. The dissemination of this work will be essential


for healthcare actors in optimizing their governance, clinical, administrative, and public


engagement procedures in their day to day activities.

       Although a number of safeguards have been implemented to ensure the


robustness of this research, the dynamic nature of social media provides an inherent


limitation of this work. Unfortunately the majority of the evidence for the use, adoption,

and implementation of social media remains outside of the peer-reviewed literature.


This makes it difficult for decision makers to accept and value the intrinsic contributions


that social media can provide to their organizations and health(care) practices.

What We Would Like to Know


       Understanding how social media tools and technologies impact quality, access,


and cost of healthcare delivery will and should remain a top priority for health(care)

actors and institutions. Further research is necessary to develop new (or adapt existing)


frameworks on the ethics, effectiveness, impact, and return of investment of digital


social spaces. It is also key that we understand the appropriate incentives that support

clinicians and institutions in augmenting the therapeutic relationship that can emerge


through social media; this will not only help improve healthcare delivery, but it will also


ensure that new emerging tools are used in the safest, most ethical, and effective

possible manner.


       Finally, understanding the benefits, functionalities and contextual applications


that social media can provide to the healthcare establishment are vitally important.



                                                                                       90
Although this work has provided the what, where, when, how, and why social media

may be safely and appropriately adopted, it is necessary to formally document


established practices across the spectrum of healthcare actors using these tools.


Furthermore, it is important to ponder whether clinical trials are necessary before the

healthcare establishment accepts that social media has penetrated its “safety” walls.


Widely available mobile devices (e.g. smart phones, iPads, etc.) make it nearly


impossible to prevent access to social media in virtually any context. Convincing

different actors however, of the benefits of social media will likely remain a challenge


due to the conservative nature of medicine and the healthcare establishment as a


whole. However, a much clearer picture of benefits and risk must be developed

thorough research to make progress and ensure that the safest practices possible are


followed when healthcare is delivered through computer-mediated communication


tools like social media.



























                                                                                   91
                                    REFERENCES


[1] Wikipedia. History of communication. [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from
      http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_communication.

[2] Wikipedia. Scriptorium. [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from
      http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scriptorium.

[3] Wikipedia. Orality. [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from
      http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Orality.

[4] Wikipedia. Understanding media: The extensions of man. [cited 2012 June 20].
      Available from
      http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Understanding_Media:_The_Extensions_of_Man.

[5] Wikipedia. Social media. [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from
      http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_media.

[6] Wikipedia. Type 2 Diabetes. [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from
      http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Type_2_Diabetes.

[7] World Health Organization. Hand hygiene tweet. [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from
      https://twitter.com/WHO/status/223408604185767938.
[8] Dimov V. Pneumonia and septic shock. [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from

      http://clinicalcases.org/2004/08/pneumonia-and-septic-shock.html.
[9] Eysenbach G. Consumer health informatics. BMJ. 2000; 320(7251):1713-6.

[10] Moore GE. Cramming more components onto integrated circuits. Proc IEEE. 1998;
      86(1):82-5.

[11] Wikipedia. Game boy. [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from
      http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Game_Boy.

[12] Wikipedia. Metcalfe's law. [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from
      http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metcalfe's_law.

[13] Search Networking. Metcalfe's law. [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from
      http://searchnetworking.techtarget.com/definition/Metcalfes-Law.

[14] Briscoe B, Odlyzko A, Tilly, B. Metcalfe's law is wrong. [cited 2012 June 20].
      Available from http://spectrum.ieee.org/computing/networks/metcalfes-law-is-
      wrong/.

[15] International Telecommunications Union. Broadband: A platform for progress. A
      report by the broadband commission for digital Development. International
      Telecommunications Union & United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural

      Organization. 2011.
[16] World Bank. World development indicators. [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from

      http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators.
[17] Elliott N. Canadian social technographics revealed – A social computing report.
      Forrester Research. 2009.



                                                                                      92
[18] IMIA Social Media Working Group. IMIA SMEWG at Medicine 2.0. [cited 2012 June
      20]. Available from http://imiasocialmedia.wordpress.com/2010/11/28/imia-
      social-media-wg-at-medicine-2-0-nl/.

[19] Dzenowagis J, Clauson K, Grajales III FJ. Ethics 2.0: Implications of connected health.
      Medicine 2.0 Congress, Toronto, Canada. 2009.

[20] TechCrunch. The Twitter cycle: Curiosity, abandonment, addiction. Global visitors
      hit 37 million. [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from
      http://techcrunch.com/2009/06/25/the-twitter-cycle-curiosity-abandonment-

      addiction-global-visitors-hit-37-million/
[21] Wikipedia. Social network analysis. [cited June 2012 June 20]. Available from

      http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_network_analysis.
[22] Greenhalgh T, Robert G, Macfarlane F, Bate P, Kyriakidou O. Diffusion of

      innovations in service organizations: systematic review and recommendations.
      Milbank Q. 2004; 82(4):581-629.

[23] Rogers EM. Diffusion of innovations. 5th ed. New York (NY): Free Press; 2003.
[24] Wikipedia. Technology adoption lifecycle. [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from

      http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Technology-Adoption-Lifecycle.png.
[25] Levitt SD, Dubner SJ. Freakonomics: A rogue economist explores the hidden side of
      everything. New York: William Morrow; 2005.

[26] Mesko B. Blogterview with Dr. Flea. [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from
      http://scienceroll.com/2007/01/26/blogterview-with-dr-flea/.

[27] Greenhalgh T, Russell J. Why do evaluations of ehealth programs fail? An
      alternative set of guiding principles. PLoS Med. 2010; 7(11):e1000360.

[28] Eysenbach G. Medicine 2.0: social networking, collaboration, participation,
      apomediation, and openness. J Med Internet Res. 2008;10(3):e22.

[29] Signorini A, Segre AM, Polgreen PM. The use of Twitter to track levels of disease
      activity and public concern in the U.S. during the influenza A H1N1 pandemic. PLoS

      One. 2011;6(5):e19467.
[30] Laurent CR. Twitt-ER: Using Twitter in the E.R. for dispatch, order com, patient
      alerts and progress reports towards the waiting room. Medicine 2.0 Congress,

      Toronto, Canada. 2009.
[31] Schinköthe T, Wallwiener M. Improving clinical trial recruitment for breast cancer

      patient using web and APP solutions. Boston, USA. Medicine 2.0 Congress, Boston,
      USA. 2012.

[32] Grau I, Grajales III FJ, Gene J, Bernardo M, De Semir M. Success in virtual clinics for
      hispanics: Lessons learned from Forumclinic users. Medicine 2.0 Congress,
      Toronto, Canada. 2009.

[33] Househ MS, Kushniruk AW, Maclure M, Carleton B, Cloutier-Fisher D. (2011). Virtual
      knowledge production within a physician educational outreach program.

      Knowledge Management & E-Learning: An International Journal. 2011;3(1):24-34.



                                                                                        93
[34] Winkelman WJ, Wei Choo CW. Provider-sponsored virtual communities for chronic
      patients: improving health outcomes through organizational patient-centred
      knowledge management. Health Expect. 2003;6(4):352-8.

[35] Schreiber WE, Giustini DM. Pathology in the era of Web 2.0. Am J Clin Pathol.
      2009;132(6):824-8.

[36] McGee JB, Begg M. What medical educators need to know about “Web 2.0” Med
      Teach. 2008; 30(2):164-9.

[37] Hughes B, Joshi I, Lemonde H, Wareham J. Junior physician's use of Web 2.0 for
      information seeking and medical education: a qualitative study. Int J Med Inform.
      2009;78(10):645-55.

[38] Boulos MNK, Maramba I, Wheeler S. Wikis, blogs and podcasts: a new generation of
      Web-based tools for virtual collaborative clinical practice and education. BMC

      Med Educ. 2006;6:41.
[39] Clauson KA, Polen HH, Boulos MN, Dzenowagis JH. Scope, completeness, and

      accuracy of drug information in Wikipedia. Ann Pharmacother. 2008;42(12):1814-
      21.

[40] Pelcher D, Miles J, Clauson K, Zeng-treitler Q, Kandula S. Readability of the top 50
      prescribed drugs in Wikipedia. Medicine 2.0 Congress, Toronto, Canada. 2009.
[41] Surendra N Singh, S.N., Dalal, N., Spears, N. Understanding web home page

      perception. European Journal of Information Systems. 2005;14:288-302.
[42] Thompson LA, Black E, Duff WP, Paradise Black N, Saliba H, Dawson K. Protected

      health information on social networking sites: Ethical and legal considerations. J
      Med Internet Res. 2011;13(1):e8.

[43] Dzenowagis J, Roy S, Clauson K. Risk 2.0: The future of connected health. Medicine
      2.0 Congress, Toronto, Canada. 2008.

[44] Crawford SY. Internet pharmacy: Issues of access, quality, costs, and regulation. J
      Med Syst. 2003;27(1):57-65.

[45] Anderson PF, Blumenthal J, Bruell D, Rosenzweig M, Conte M, Song J. An online and
      social media training curricula to facilitate bench-to-bedside information transfer.
      Positioning the Profession: the Tenth International Congress on Medical

      Librarianship, Brisbane, Australia. 2009;1-11.
[46] Mrazek D. Mayo Clinic Depression blog. [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from
      http://www.mayoclinic.com/health/depression-blog/MY00151.

[47] Wikipedia. Obsessive-compulsive disorder.  http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ocd.

[48] Seeman N, Ing A, Rizo C. Assessing and responding in real time to online anti-
      vaccine sentiment during a flu pandemic. Healthc Q. 2010;13:8-15.

[49] Signorini A, Segre AM, Polgreen PM. The use of Twitter to track levels of disease
      activity and public concern in the U.S. during the influenza A H1N1 pandemic. PLoS
      One. 2011;6(5):e19467.





                                                                                       94
[50] Donahue M. Patient Recruitment via social media: Lessons learned. Pharm
      Executive Blog. [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from
      http://blog.pharmexec.com/2012/02/13/patient-recruitment-via-social-media-

      lessons-learned/.
[51] American Medical Association. AMA Policy: Professionalism in the use of social

      media. [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from  http://www.ama-
      assn.org/ama/pub/meeting/professionalism-social-media.shtml.
[52] Kennedy S. Placenta Facebook photos: Nurse and mommy tribes see student

      expulsion differently. [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from
      http://ajnoffthecharts.com/2011/01/12/placenta-facebook-photos-nurse-and-
      mommy-tribes-see-student-expulsion-differently/.

[53] Schreiber WE, Giustini DM. Pathology in the era of Web 2.0. Am J Clin Pathol. 2009;
      132(6):824-8.

[54] Jadad AR, Enkin MW. Randomized controlled trials: Questions, answers and
      musings, 2nd Edition. BMJ Books. 2007.

[55] Pawson R, Greenhalgh T, Harvey G, Walshe K. Realist review-a new method of
      systematic review designed for complex policy interventions. Journal of Health

      Services Research & Policy. 2005;(10) Suppl 1: 21–34.
[56] Ganann R, Ciliska D, Thomas H. Expediting systematic reviews: methods and

      implications of rapid reviews. Implement Sci. 2010;5:56.
[57] Levac D, Colquhoun H, O'Brien KK. Scoping studies: advancing the methodology.
      Implement Sci. 2010;5:69.

[58] World Health Organization. eHealth [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from
      http://www.who.int/trade/glossary/story021/en/index.html.

[59] Vital Wave Consulting. mHealth for development: The opportunity of mobile
      technology for healthcare in the developing world. Washington, D.C. and

      Berkshire, UK. UN Foundation-Vodafone Foundation Partnership. 2009.
[60] Giustini D, Grajales III FJ, Hooker D. Using social media to promote evidence based
                 th
      practice. 9 Annual Cochrane Canada Symposium, Vancouver, BC. 2011.
[61] Wikipedia. Social networking service. [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from

      http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_networking_service.
[62] Wikipedia. Professional networking dervice. [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from
      http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Professional_network_service.

[63] Wikipedia. Mashup. [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from
      http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mashup_(web_application_hybrid).

[64] Wikipedia. Collaborative filtering. [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from
      http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Collaborative_filtering

[65] Kovic I, Lulic I, Brumini G. Examining the medical blogosphere: an online survey of
      medical bloggers. J Med Internet Res. 2008;10(3):e28.





                                                                                        95
[66] Wikipedia. Paul F. Levy. [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from
      http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paul_F._Levy.

[67] Chretien K, Goldman E, Faselis C. The reflective writing class blog: Using technology
      to promote reflection and professional Development. J Gen Intern Med.
      2008;23(12):2066-70.

[68] Mayo Clinic. Sharing Mayo Clinic: Stories from patients, family, friends, and Mayo
      Clinic staff. [cited 2012 June 20]. Available fromttp://sharing.mayoclinic.org/.

[69] CNN Health. Dr. Sanjay Gupta. [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from
      http://sanjayguptamd.blogs.cnn.com/.

[70] Marina del Rey Hospital. Surgery superior for obese diabetic patients, studies say.
      [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from http://blog.marinahospital.com/surgery-
      superior-for-obese-diabetic-patients-studies-say/.

[71] Donahue M. Patient Recruitment via social media: Lessons learned. Pharm
      Executive Blog. [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from

      http://blog.pharmexec.com/2012/02/13/patient-recruitment-via-social-media-
      lessons-learned/.

[72] Six Until Me. About Kerri Morrone Sparling. [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from
      http://www.sixuntilme.com/about/.
[73] deBronkart, D. e-Patient Dave: A voice of patient engagement. [cited 2012 June 20].

      Available from http://epatientdave.com/.
[74] Wikipedia. E-Patient. [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from

      http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/E-patient.
[75] Konovalov S, Scotch M, Post L, Brandt C. Biomedical informatics techniques for

      processing and analyzing web blogs of military service members. J Med Internet
      Res. 2010;12(4):e45.

[76] Kennedy RS. Weblogs, social software, and the new interactivity on the web.
      Psychiatr Serv. 2004;55:247-9.

[77] Price B. Disseminating best practice through a web log. Nurs Stand. 2010;24(29):35-
      40.
[78] Poonawalla T, Wagner RF. Assessment of a blog as a medium for dermatology

      education. Dermatol Online J. 2006;12(1):5.
[79] Twitter. The Twitter glossary [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from

      http://support.twitter.com/articles/166337-the-twitter-glossary.
[80] Mollett A, Moran D, Dunleavy P. Using Twitter in university research, teaching and

      impact activities: A guide for academics and researchers. [cited 2012 June 20].
      Available from http://eprints.lse.ac.uk/38489/.

[81] Baumann P. 140 healthcare uses for Twitter. [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from
      http://philbaumann.com/2009/01/16/140-health-care-uses-for-twitter/.






                                                                                         96
[82] George DR, Dellasega C. Use of social media in graduate-level medical humanities
      education: Two pilot studies from Penn State College of Medicine. Med Teach.
      2011;33(8):e429-34.

[83] Douglas F, Silvey, N. Twitter journal club. [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from
      http://www.twitjc.com/.

[84] Brandenburg BJ, Jansen E. The proof of the Pudding: First Results of a Primary Care
      Consultation Service on Twitter. Medicine 2.0 Congress, Maastricht, the
      Netherlands. 2010.

[85] Brandenburg BJ, Jansen E. What lies around the bend? Exploring next steps in social
      media and primary care. Medicine 2.0 Congress, Stanford, USA. 2011.

[86] Farmer AD, Bruckner Holt CEM, Cook MJ, Hearing SD. Social networking sites: a
      novel portal for communication. Postgrad Med J. 2009;85(1007):455-9.

[87] Bender JL, Jimenez-Marroquin MC, Jadad, AR. Seeking support on facebook: a
      content analysis of breast cancer groups. J Med Internet Res. 2011;13(1):e16.

[88] Abdul SS, Lin CW, Scholl J, Fernandez-Luque L, Jian WS, Hsu MH, Liou DM, Li YC.
      Facebook use leads to health-care reform in Taiwan. Lancet.

      2011;377(9783):2083-4.
[89] Fernandez-Luque L, Karlsen R, Krogstad T, Burkow TM, Vognild LK. Personalized
      health applications in the Web 2.0: the emergence of a new approach. Conf Proc

      IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2010;1053-6.
[90] Bull SS, Breslin LT, Wright EE, Black SR, Levine D, Santelli JSD. Case study: an ethics

      case study of HIV prevention research on Facebook: The just/us study. J Pediatr
      Psychol. 2011;36(10):1082-92.

[91] Frydman GJ. Patient-driven research: rich opportunities and real risks. Journal of
      Participatory Medicine. 2009;1(1):e12.

[92] Curetogether. Curetogether surprising new data: What really helps patients with
      Chronic Fatigue Syndrome [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from
      http://curetogether.com/blog/2011/02/03/surprising-new-data-what-really-

      helps-patients-with-chronic-fatigue-syndrome/.
[93] Heilman JM, Kemmann E, Bonert M, Chatterjee A, Ragar B, Beards GM, Iberri DJ,

      Harvey M, Thomas B, Stomp W, Martone MF, Lodge DJ, Vondracek A, de Wolff JF,
      Liber C, Grover SC, Vickers TJ, Meskó B, Laurent MR. Wikipedia: a key tool for
      global public health promotion. J Med Internet Res. 2011;13(1):e14.

[94] World Health Organization. Production of ICD-11: The overall revision process.
      [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from
      http://www.who.int/classifications/icd/ICDRevision.pdf.

[95] Archambault PM, van de Belt TH, Grajales III FJ, Eysenbach G, Aubin K, Gold I,
      Gagnon MP, Kuziemsky CE, Turgeon AF, Poitras J, Faber MJ, Kremer JA, Heldoorn

      M, Bilodeau A, Légaré F. Wikis and collaborative writing applications in health
      care: A scoping review protocol. JMIR Res Protoc. 2012;1(1):e1.




                                                                                        97
[96] The Etherpad Foundation. Features. [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from
      http://etherpad.org/features/.

[97] Wikipedia. John Snow. [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from
      http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Snow_(physician).
[98] Wikipedia. Bayesian statistics. [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from

      http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bayesian_statistics.
[99] HealthMap. About HealthMap. [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from

      http://healthmap.org/about/.
[100] HLWiki Canada. Social bookmarking sites. [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from

      http://hlwiki.slais.ubc.ca/index.php/Social_bookmarking_sites.
[101] Connotea. About Connotea. [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from

      http://www.connotea.org/about.
[102] Blendtech. Will it blend? - Ipad [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from

      http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lAl28d6tbko.
[103] Costello J. Baby Panda Sneezing. [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from
      http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EAcdvmnZ_GM&feature=fvst.

[104] Britain’s Got Talent 2009. [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from
      http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RxPZh4AnWyk.

[105] Fernandez-Luque L, Elahi N, Grajales III FJ. An analysis of personal medical
      information disclosed in YouTube videos created by patients with Multiple

      Sclerosis. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2009;150:292-6.
[106] Keelan J, Pavri-Garcia V, Tomlinson G, Wilson K. YouTube as a source of

      information on immunization: a content analysis. JAMA. 2007;298(21):2482-4.
[107] Steglman I. [Personal Communication] March 2nd, 2010.

[108] White G. Second Life for the visually impaired [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from
      http://blindsecondlife.blogspot.com/2008/01/haptics.html.

[109] Conradi E, Kavia S, Burden D, Rice A, Woodham L, Beaumont C, Savin-Baden M,
      Poulton T. Virtual patients in a virtual world: Training paramedic students for
      practice. Med Teach. 2009;31(8):713-20.

[110] Yellowlees PM, Cook JN. Education about hallucinations using an internet virtual
      reality system: a qualitative survey. Acad Psychiatry. 2006;30(6):534-9.

[111] Gordon R, Björklund NK, Smith RJ, Blyden ER. Halting HIV/AIDS with avatars and
      havatars: a virtual world approach to modeling epidemics. BMC Public Health

      2009;(9) Suppl 1:S13.
[112] Yellowlees P, Cook JN, Marks SL, Wolfe D, Mangin E. Can virtual reality be used to

      conduct mass prophylaxis clinic training? A pilot program. Biosecur Bioterror.
      2008;(1):36-44.
[113] Gorini A, Gaggioli A, Vigna C, Riva G. A second life for eHealth: prospects for the

      use of 3-D virtual worlds in clinical psychology. J Med Internet Res. 2008;
      10(3):e21.



                                                                                        98
[114] Dean E, Cook S, Keating M, Murphy J. Does this avatar make me look fat? Obesity
      and interviewing in Second Life. Journal of Virtual Worlds Research. 2009;2(2):4-
      11.

[115] Hansen MM. Versatile, immersive, creative and dynamic virtual 3-D healthcare
      learning environments: a review of the literature. J Med Internet Res 2008; 10(3):

      e26.
[116] Beard L, Wilson K, Morra D, Keelan J. A survey of health-related activities on
      second life. J Med Internet Res. 2009;11(2):e17.

[117] British Medical Association. Using social media: practical and ethical guidance for
      doctors and medical students. [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from

      http://www.medschools.ac.uk/SiteCollectionDocuments/social_media_guidance_
      may2011.pdf.

[118] Canadian Medical Association. Social media and Canadian physicians - issues and
      rules of engagement. [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from
      http://www.cma.ca/socialmedia.

[119] Hrynaszkiewicz I, Norton ML, Vickers AJ, Altman DG. Preparing raw clinical data for
      publication: guidance for journal editors, authors, and peer reviewers. Trials.

      2010;11:9.
[120] Bordeaux C. Policy database. [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from

      http://socialmediagovernance.com/policies.php.
[121] Kind T, Genrich G, Sodhi A, Chretien KC. Social media policies at US medical
      schools. Med Educ Online. 2010;15.

[122] Chretien KC, Azar J, Kind T. Physicians on Twitter. JAMA. 2011;305(6):566-8.

[123] Healthcare Blogger Code of Ethics. [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from
      http://www.creativetriage.com/tag/healthcare-blogger-code-of-ethics/.

[124] Health on the Net Foundation. [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from
      http://www.hon.ch/HONcode/Pro/.

[125] New York Personal Injury Law Blog. My interview with Robert (Dr. Flea) Lindeman.
      [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from
      http://www.newyorkpersonalinjuryattorneyblog.com/2008/01/my-interview-

      with-robert-dr-flea-lindeman.html.
[126] Brown P. WHO calls for a health domain name to help consumers. BMJ.
      2002;324(7337):566.

[127] Wikipedia. Diabetes. [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from
      http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Diabetes.

[128] Medpedia. Diabetes. [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from
      http://wiki.medpedia.com/Diabetes.

[129] Moubarak G, Guiot A, Benhamou Y, Benhamou A, Hariri S. Facebook activity of
      residents and fellows and its impact on the doctor-patient relationship. J Med

      Ethics. 2011;37(2):101-4.



                                                                                       99
[130] Jacobson PD, Selvin E. Licensing telemedicine: The need for a national system.
      Telemed J E Health. 2000;6(4):429-39.

[131] Deloitte. Social media and mobile devices are raising the bar on HR service
      delivery. [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from
      http://www.deloitte.com/assets/Dcom-

      UnitedStates/Local%20Assets/Documents/us_consulting_hctrends2012_socialmo
      bile_021512.pdf
[132] Collmann J, Cooper T. Breaching the security of the Kaiser Permanente Internet

      patient portal: the organizational foundations of information security. JAMIA.
      2007;14(2):239-43.

[133] Hawn C. Take two aspirin and tweet me in the morning: how Twitter, Facebook,
      and other social media are reshaping health care. Health Aff. 2009;28(2):361-8.

[134] Parsell M. Pernicious virtual communities: Identity, polarization, and the Web 2.0.
      Ethics and Information Technology. 2008; 10(1):41-56.

[135] Aker J, Smith A. The dragonfly model. [cited 2012 June 20]. Available from
      http://www.dragonflyeffect.com/blog/model/.

[136] Turkewitz E. Doctor "Flea" settles malpractice suit after blog exposed in court.
      [cited 2012 June 20]. Available at
      http://www.newyorkpersonalinjuryattorneyblog.com/2007/05/doctor-flea-

      settles-malpractice-suit-after-blog-exposed-in-court.html.
[137] Daily Mail. Four nursing students expelled from university after posting pictures of
      themselves posing with a human placenta on Facebook. [cited 2012 June 20].

      Available from http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-1343628/4-nursing-
      students-expelled-posting-Facebook-human-placenta-pictures.html.

[138] Impacted Nurse. Nursing student dismissed over placenta pic. [cited 2012 June
      20]. Available from http://www.impactednurse.com/?p=2510.

[139] Grajales III FJ. Why cant we protect doctors who put patients first? Journal of
      Participatory Medicine. Letters. 2011;3:e36.

[140] Anonymous. Story Tell ER Doc: A peek behind the curtain. [cited 2012 June 20].
      Available athttp://storytellerdoc.blogspot.ca/.\

[141] Dimov V. Dr. Flea blogged his malpractice trial, settles when outed. [cited 2012
      June 20]. Available athttp://casesblog.blogspot.ca/2007/05/dr-flea-blogged-his-
      malpractice-trial.html.

[142] [Ch 3 J] College of Physicians and Surgeons of British Columbia. Professional
      standards and guidelines – social media and online networking forums. [cited
      2012 June 20]. Available at https://www.cpsbc.ca/files/u6/Social-Media-and-

      Online-Networking-Forums.pdf.








                                                                                       100