                                 th
                               26 Bled eConference

                                   eInnovations:
       Challenges and Impacts for Individuals, Organizations and Society

                    June 9, 2013 – June 13, 2013; Bled, Slovenia





                 Social Networking and Dental Care:
   State of the Art and Analysis of the Impact on Dentists,

                  Dental Practices and their Patients

                                  Sojen Pradhan
                  University of Technology Sydney (UTS), Australia
                           sojendra.pradhan@uts.edu.au

                                    Valerie Gay
                  University of Technology Sydney (UTS), Australia

                               valerie.gay@uts.edu.au

                                    Surya Nepal
                            CSIRO ICT Centre, Australia
                               surya.nepal@csiro.au

Abstract
Health Social networking sites offering search, reviews and recommendation are gaining
popularity. This paper reviews the most popular social networking sites related to dental
care. Social networks such as DrOogle and Yelp enable their users to review and rate their

dentists and dental practices. Such information is then used to rank and recommend dentists
or dental practices to new users/patients. This paper compares the dental care social
networking sites in terms of their features and criteria supported for search, reviews and
recommendations of dentists or dental practices. Mismatches between features and criteria
among different dental care reviews sites are identified, which may cause inconsistency in the
recommendations in the dental care. Therefore, this paper proposes a new framework for
dynamic dental care recommendation system which takes both local (personalised) and
global (crowdsourced) trust into account. It analyses the impact of current social networks on

dentists, dental practices and their patients. Finally, it identifies the open issues and
challenges that need to be addressed to design a trustworthy recommendation system for both
the dental professionalsd their patients.

Keywords: health social networks, dental review sites, search, ratings, rankings,
recommendations, trust.


1.   Introduction
The use of Social Networking Sites (SNSs) has made a substantial impact on the revolution of
health care digital communications and has changed the role of both health care professionals
and patients. Healthcare consumers have moved from searching information online to sharing




                                                                                 178
                                                         Sojen Pradhan, Valerie Gay, Surya Nepal



information and in fact interacting with other users within a platform (Lober and Flowers
2011). These platforms are referred as Health Social Networks (HSNs). They allow their
members to create, retrieve and share information and experiences. Examples include
MedHelp , PatientsLikeMe , DailyStrength , CureTogether , Tudiabetes , Asthmapolis etc.    6
(Swan 2012). These popular platforms provide valuable information about symptoms and
treatments of various illnesses as well as opportunities for people to discuss their experiences
with health professionals or other users with similar symptoms and experiences.

Pew Research Center (Lee 2012) reported a rising number of e-patients stating that 80%
internet users in the US get health information online, third most popular online activity after
email and search (Gallant et al. 2011), 60% use social media and 19% consult rankings of the
providers. One of the most popular features of the online world is „peer review‟ and ratings on
any product or service. These ratings are shaping and influencing public views on health
issues such as vaccines, mental health, and dental implants. By doing so, healthcare patients
are empowered and able to find other patients in similar illnesses or health situations. They
are able to interact with each other about conditions, symptoms and treatments (Swan 2009).
The HSN platforms provide opportunity to be able to connect and relate with each other. It
has been reported that 23% of chronic health e-patients have searched for other patients with

similar conditions (Lober and Flowers 2011).
Dental care falls under the category of health care and a specialized social network for dental
care has not been emerged yet. However, dental reviews and rankings sites in the form of
social networks have emerged to help their users finding a dentist or dental practice in a given
location. These sites allow users to review or rate their dentists or dental practices and based
on that information, the sites provide rankings or recommendation.

The contribution of this paper can be summarized as follows:
   It provides an overview of HSNs and existing dental search, reviews and

    recommendation sites.
   It compares the features and criteria used in different sites to search, rate and rank the
    dentists or dental practices.
   It identifies the criteria these sites are using to help users/patients find the right dentist
    or dental practice. However, there are many mismatches of the criteria amongst the
    sites.
   It briefly analyses the impacts of these sites to the dentists or dental practices and their
    patients.
   It proposes a new framework for dynamic dental care recommendation system to find
    the most suitable and trustworthy dentist or dental practice. The new framework is
    dedicated to reduce any negative impacts in the dental care society.

The remainder of this paper is organised in the sections. Section 2 discusses the popularity of
HSNs and introduces the emerging dental specific search and review sites. Section 3 focuses
on dental care social networks and it compares their features and their search, review and
recommendation criteria. Section 4 introduces a proposed framework for dynamic dental care
recommendation system by incorporating preferred criteria and trust derived from social




1 www.medhelp.org
2 www.patientslikeme.com
3 www.dailystrength.org
4 www.curetogether.com
5 www.tudiabetes.org
6 www.asthmapolis.com






                                                                                             179
        Social Networking and Dental Care: State of the Art and Analysis of the Impact on Dentists ...



networks as well as crowdsources of dental information. The paper concludes with a
discussion on impact on Dentists, Dental Practices and their Patients and on open issues.


2.    Health Social Networks (HSNs)

The growing popularity of social media has made it easier to collect and rapidly analyse
public health information such as data from food-borne illness or infectious disease outbreaks
or dental implants. Nowadays, not all patients are automatically accepting doctors‟ or
dentists‟ recommendation without doing their own online research (Ratzan 2011). If patients
fail to have their need (e.g. questions, certainty of illness, understanding, etc.) fulfilled
through direct communication with health professionals they may become frustrated and
experience increasing uncertainty of their illness which would lead them to search on Internet,
an alternative source (Hou & Shim 2010 and Tustin 2010). Indeed, unsatisfying interpersonal
channel for patients has been a significant motivator for mediated channel such as HSNs. The
Internet has become a better source of information in some cases than physical healthcare
providers for patients (Hou & Shim 2010). Moturu & Liu (2010) quoted that a survey
indicated 81% of adult users have used the Internet for health information and acknowledged
that the Internet is the most widely used source for health information ahead of doctors,

friends and families. But, is the information trustworthy? And is the data accurate? Search
engines cannot provide answers to these questions (Moturu & Liu 2010).
Nonetheless, the users of HSNs are increasing as they can find comments or information
related to the specific health condition or symptoms or find others who have experienced
similar health issues. The users are not only able to retrieve related information but also create
and share their experiences through the platform.        Moreover, the users/patients can get
emotional support by seeing others with similar health symptoms/conditions and feel “I am

not alone”, which empowers users/patients and give them a sense of community so that they
would go back and share more in the same platform (Swan 2009). It is one of the most
efficient approaches to win users/patients‟ hearts or allow them to trust the platform. Some of
the HSN platforms are successful in allowing their users to share a lot of information about
their medication, side effects, and types of therapies along with their symptoms. The HSNs
have been used by both health professionals and patients, transforming the way health
consumers connect, search and communicate. One of the most important factors for
users/patients to use such platform is trust. Trust plays an important role for healthcare
consumers to reduce uncertainty in technology-mediated environment (Hernández-Ortega
2011) and to decide whether to use the information or not to make their health related
sensitive decisions.

The similar trend exists for dental care services as well. A website dedicated to dentist
reviews quoted, “About 60% of population has some fear of dentist… and the best way to find
a dentist is through unbiased patient reviews of dentists.” (TheDentistReviews.com). It also
provides a list of dentists reviews sites, such as DentalCenter         7, DentalFearCentral , 8
DentistDig , DentistReviewsOnline    10 and DrOogle . Dental professionals are also listed
under other health professionals review sites such as RateMDs        12 and HealthGrades   13.In
addition, a generic review site Yelp   14 has been gaining popularity in the US for dentist



7 www.dentalcenter.com
8 www.dentalfearcentral.org
9 www.dentistdig.com
10 www.dentistreviewsonline.com
11 www.doctoroogle.com
12 www.ratemds.com
13 www.healthgrades.com
14 www.yelp.com





                                                                                            180
                                                        Sojen Pradhan, Valerie Gay, Surya Nepal



reviews, which allows patients to post reviews/comments about their visits to their dentists.
Amongst all, DrOogle is one of the most dedicated sites for dental professionals in the US,
which provides rankings on dentists based on patients‟ positive reviews (Dr.Oogle.com).
However, the problem is not only there are many different sites available but also the different
measuring criteria amongst the sites make it harder to choose the right dentist.

As mentioned earlier, trust is crucial for users/patients to use the information available online
and it is paramount for dental care due to the invasive nature of treatment and the level of fear
people have towards the dental treatment. For instance, a study in dental care patients by
Rodriguez-Vazquez (2008) revealed that 96.8% of the participants in Spain (out of total 804
patients) showed some degree of stress about dental treatment. The same study also quoted
that dental fear can upset up to 50% of the general population. Another dental health survey
showed that 46% of the participants in Australia were anxious about going to the dentist
(Armitage & Reidy 2012). Armfield (2010) defined a term „dental beliefs scale‟ as a
measurement of dental fear, which calculates subjective perception of dentist behaviour and
beliefs related to lack of power, control, and trust.

3.    Dental Care Social Networks – State of the art

Many researchers in the area of dental care has been exploring subjective attributes which
affects patients during the visit to the dental clinic such as dental fear (Armitage & Reidy
2012, Armfied 2010, Armfield et al. 2009, McNeil et al. 2011, Ng & Leung 2008 and
Rodriguez-Vazquez et al. 2008) and quality of care (Clarkson et al. 2010, Eriksen et al. 2008,
Elgin 2012, Merijohn et al. 2008, Sbaraini et al. 2012, St. Louis et al. 2009 and Yarascavitch
et al. 2009). Few other researchers discussed other attributes such as regular visits (Beirne et
al. 2008 and Ito et al. 2012) safety (Perea-Perez et al. 2011) knowledge and education
(Hedman et al. 2009). Sbaraini et al. (2012) stated that dental patients‟ expectations are
proportionately related to dental professionals‟ friendly caring attitudes, confidence and
caring dental team helped patients to take control of their own oral health.”tive and

There are many sites where the Internet users can search for dentists and get reviews. In an
attempt to alleviate and compromise the dental anxiety and give confidence to the patients,
dental reviews and ratings sites are emerging in the Internet world. However, some of them
have only basic functionality such as location (postal code or suburb) whereas some others are
gaining popularity and acquainting more features such as specialities of dentists, service
looking for and even insurance plans. Table 1 shows some of the dental review sites, their
established year, average monthly visitors in the year of 2009 and membership fees. The table
is sub-categorised into dentistry, healthcare and business sectors because the review sites for
dentists are also spread across both healthcare and general business reviews as well.



















                                                                                          181
        Social Networking and Dental Care: State of the Art and Analysis of the Impact on Dentists ...





Review Site Address              Established Year      Monthly visitors as of Membership fee
                                                       2009

doctoroogle.com                          2004                 60,000           US$18 (one off)

dentalfearcentral.org                    2005                 19,500                 free

dentalcenter.com                         1996                 11,000                 free
dentistdig.com                           2009                  5,200                 free

dentistreviewsonline.com                 2008                   100                  free

dentist-ratings.net                      2008                   N/A                  free

 nationaldentalreviews.org               2011                   N/A                  free

1800dentist.com                          N/A                    N/A                  free

   Healthcare – the following sites also allow patients to review on dentists

ratemds.com                             2003                 450,000                 free

healthgrades.com                        1999                2,000,000                free

  Business – the site below is popular for reviews on dentists among other local businesses.


yelp.com                                2003                6,500,000               free
Angieslist.com                          1995                  65,000           US$26 per year


               Table 1. Reviews or Rating sites (source: thedentistreviews.com)

Summary of some of the dental specific platforms are given below.

DrOogle: This site allows dental patients to write reviews and personal feedbacks to their
dentists or dental practices. The patients can rate the dentists or dental practices on specific
criteria with a likert scale between 1 to 4 on „facilities‟, „service‟, „painless‟, „results‟ and
„cost‟. In addition to the reviews/feedback and ratings on their dental visits, the patients are
also asked to provide feedback on dental hygienist. Based on positive reviews and ratings, the

dentists are ranked within a particular location/suburb of the US. This site is paid service
(US$18 to become a member) and it is regulated so that the users can only post one review
per dentist. This site also monitors shilling attacks (biased behavior and in fact making
positive reviews to yourselves) to provide fair ratings to the users. At the time of writing,
there are 171,796 reviews available from the patients and it is increasing everyday

(Doctoroogle.com).
Dental Fear Central: This is a non-commercial site which provides awareness to the public

about the dental anxiety/fear. It is based in UK but it has been gradually expanded around the
world. The dentist reviews and recommendations forum is now expanded to Australia,
Europe, New Zealand and other countries in the world. This site provides the services such as
'dental phobia support forum', 'commons fears in dental' and 'tips to deal with them', 'step by
step guide to search for a dentist', 'psychological ways of tackling dental phobia', 'tips for

dentists' and 'dental FAQ'.
All dental patients, students and professionals are welcomed in this site. Main motive is to

spread awareness in regards to dental anxiety. Dental fear central site has put quotes from its
users such as, “ So much of it is about having the right dentist, one who will stop when you tell
them to stop and who you trust 100%. I was ….. and who understood my fears.” and “Just






                                                                                            182
                                                          Sojen Pradhan, Valerie Gay, Surya Nepal



want to say a big thank you – I had a very bad fear of the dentist ….. I now have a beautiful
mouthful of teeth ….information you supplied me.”
Other Dental Search, Reviews sites: There are many other dental search and reviews sites
emerging. Most of them allow users to find the dentist based on the location (post code) and
their own criteria and patients‟ reviews. For example, National Dental Reviews has come up
with the rating criteria: „office cleanliness‟, „staff cleanliness‟, „short wait time‟, „chairside
manner‟ and „explained treatment‟ for patients to rate between 1 to 5 stars.

HealthGrades: This is another site in the healthcare sector which helps to find doctors,
dentists and hospitals based on location. It does not allow writing reviews in free text but
shows the result of short online survey filled by the patients‟ satisfaction. The criteria used on
the short survey are divided into 5 likert scales from „poor‟ to „excellent‟ and „definitely not‟
to „definitely yes‟. The survey question includes „scheduling appointments‟, „office
environment‟, „office friendliness‟, „wait time‟, „level of trust‟, „helps patients understand
their condition‟, „listens and answers questions‟, and „time spent with patient‟. In addition, it
exclusively asks the question „would you recommend to family and friends?‟
RateMDs: It is a dedicated site to find and rate doctors and dentists. The patients can rate
them on the criteria such as „staff friendliness‟, punctuality‟, „helpfulness‟ and „knowledge‟.
The site allows users to search the doctors or dentists for a location and provides a list with
scores as shown above. It allows adding doctors or dentists if they are not already in the list.















         Figure 1. Dentist search result for Sydney Australia (Source: RateMDS.com).
Yelp: This is a general business review site which helps people to find great local businesses
including dentists or dental practices based on reviews provided by the users. Yelp claims that
in second quarter of 2012, there were approximately 78 million unique visitors monthly. This
site is increasingly getting popular to find the dentists in the local area in the US. It allows
users to give an overall rate out of 5 stars and write feedback/reviews. This site also allows
the readers of the reviews to mark whether the feedback was „useful‟, „funny‟ or „cool‟.


3.1 Analysis on Dental Reviews Sites

Different criteria are used amongst different dental reviews sites to find or recommend a right
dentist, which makes it difficult for users/patients. The table 2 below shows the summary of
how some of the reviews sites mentioned in the above section differ in the services provided.


15 www.nationaldentalreviews.org







                                                                                              183
        Social Networking and Dental Care: State of the Art and Analysis of the Impact on Dentists ...




             Sites            Search   Reviews     Rate       Rank     Recommendation

   DrOogle                       √        √          √          √              √

   Dental Fear Central           √        √          ×          ×              √

   National Dental Reviews       √        √          √          ×              ×

   RateMDs                       √        √          √          √              √

   Health Grade                  √        ×          √          ×              √


   Yelp                          √        √          √          ×              ×

        Table 2. Comparison of the services provided by the sites (√ - Yes and × - No)

All the reviews sites allow the users/patients to search for a dentist based on the specific

location such as suburb or postal code. Most of them allow the users/patients to provide free
textual comments/feedbacks reviews on anything about the dental service. Only in the Health
Grade site, there is a short survey questionnaire to measure patient satisfaction. However,
almost all the reviews sites have different measuring criteria to rate a dentist or dental care
practice. The table 3 below shows a brief summary of the comparison of the criteria used on

some of those sites.
             Sites                             Criteria used likert scale


   DrOogle                    ‘like a health spa’, ‘first class service’, ‘painless procedures’ and ‘superb
                                                        results’

   Dental Fear Central                                   None


   National         Dental
                              ‘office cleanliness’, ‘staff cleanliness’, ‘short wait time’, ‘chairside manner’
   Reviews                                       and ‘explained treatment’


   RateMDs                         ‘staff friendliness’, punctuality’, ‘helpfulness’ and ‘knowledge’


                              ‘scheduling appointments’, ‘office environment’, ‘office friendliness’, ‘wait
   Health Grade                time’, ‘level of trust’, ‘helps patients understand their condition’, ‘listens
                                      and answers questions’, and ‘time spent with patient’

   Yelp                                                 Overall


                     Table 3. Comparison of the criteria used in the sites

As shown in the Table 3 above, Dental Fear Central does not rate dentist because it is
dedicated to provide awareness of dental fear to the community, hence it provides a forum to

discuss about the dental anxiety and many other tips to overcome the dental fear. Based on
specific location, the sites, DrOogle and RateMDs rank the dentists based on the positive
reviews and ratings. But exact algorithm for the ranks is not known. It is apparent that
different sites have different system in place to recommend the best dentists to the users.
Although some sites including Yelp do not directly recommend to the users/patients they

provide extensive reviews of users/patients which eventually mean indirect recommendations.







                                                                                        184
                                                 Sojen Pradhan, Valerie Gay, Surya Nepal



Since these sites are using different vocabulary terms for the criteria to rate the service, the
criteria in the above table 3 are re-arranged on the categories of: „quality of service‟, „quality
of care‟, „quality of staff‟, „quality of environment‟, „scheduling appointments‟, „waiting
time‟, „specific knowledge‟ and „explanation to the patients‟. The table 4 compares the sites
based on these categories of criteria.

          Criteria         DrOogle  National DentalRateMDs     HealthGrade  Yelp
                                      Reviews
  Quality of Service         √           ×            ×            ×         ×

  Quality of Care            √           ×            ×            √         ×

  Quality of Staff
                             ×           √            √            √         ×
  Quality of Environment
                             √           √            ×            √         ×

  Schedule appointments      ×           ×            ×            √         ×

  Wait time                  ×           √            ×            √         ×

  Specific Knowledge         ×           ×            √            √         ×

  Explanation                ×           √            √            √         ×

         Table 4. Comparison of the criteria used in the sites (√ - Yes and × - No)

This table highlights that the popular sites such as Yelp and DrOogle are more focussed on
providing free text reviews and comments rather than ratings on specific criteria.

There are no consistencies on the words the users/patients use to describe the same experience
or feelings. That has an impact on how it has been read or understood (or misunderstood). In
any activities on social media such as chatting, blogging, posting or twitting in the social
networks, a level of trust is inherent. In that environment, the user has a choice to trust the
media (particular website) especially for health related information (Hou and Shim 2010) at
the first instance, and then the information posted (content) on the media and „who has
posted‟ and so on. Trust from own social networks could be integrated with the HSNs to
enhance the trust and refine the search list. Even the search criteria can be made flexible
depending on the situation the users/patients are in to make it flexible and more trustworthy
altogether.


4.   Proposed Framework for Dental Care Recommendation
Most people make their healthcare decisions based on recommendations from people they
trust the most. The trust can be developed by number of ways in online environment such as
from the interactions, or previous postings, or similarity in dental symptoms or their expertise
in the domain. Due to the invasive nature of treatment and level of dental fear, trust becomes

very important factor while recommending a good dentist online. Trustworthiness of the sites
which provides reviews and recommendations as well as the users who provided reviews and
ratings are very important while searching for the right dentist or dental information. In this
social media age, where everyone has own social network, it would sound logical to integrate
personal social network with the HSNs to enhance trust (both local and global) of the sites,
reviews and recommendations.







                                                                               185
        Social Networking and Dental Care: State of the Art and Analysis of the Impact on Dentists ...



We have proposed a trust-based framework for dynamic dental care environment to show how
a dental patient can refine the search by measuring trust from the social networks. A
framework for dental care recommendation backed up by profile-based (local) trust and
global trust from crowdsourced dental sites can incorporate the concerns people usually have
for dental treatments. The proposed framework is shown in the figure 2.





















          Figure 2. Proposed framework for Dynamic Dental Care Recommendation.

In the framework, the patients/users select their objective and subjective criteria while
searching for the most suitable dental professionals initially. Some of the criteria are shown in
the table 4. Computation of personalised profile-based trust derived from major components
analysis (dental context, relationships and expertise) for dental care is the second step. It will
include system trust (trust of the HSNs), content trust (information or reviews) and personal
(relationship driven) trust.
Incorporating trust based on similarities of dental symptoms, hereditary, side-effects and
dental fear in the context analysis enhances the accuracy of measuring users‟ trust. In
addition, relationships with other patients/users (including FOAF – Friend of a Friend) and
their expertise in the dental care area refine and measure trust efficiently. Figure 3 shows the
snapshot of these components which have significant impacts to build personalised trust while
searching for a trustworthy dental information and professional for users/patients.


















                                                                                            186
                                                        Sojen Pradhan, Valerie Gay, Surya Nepal



















                      Figure 3. Components of Personalised Local Trust

In the framework (figure 2), the list after second step can further be refined by cross-checking
with existing crowdsourced dental reviews and rating sites (global trust) which is shown in
the table 1. Overall, the information in the form of reviews and feedbacks in those specific
dental reviews and rating sites are impacting the dentists and dental practices.

5.    Open Issues and Impacts

The number of dental reviews sites is growing and they allow the patients to leave reviews
after their visit to the dentist. As it is the case for a lot of new recommendation systems, the
majority of the ratings and feedbacks are done by the patients who are either terribly
dissatisfied (negative feedback) or very happy with the service (positive feedback). There is
one star instead of 5 stars thinking that 1 star is better than multiple stars. Another example on
the DrOogle site, '$' sign for cost, some users are using only one or two $ signs to say the
pricing/cost is not that bad. It should have been more $ signs. This individual rating does
impact overall ratings of the particular dentist and therefore overall rankings. In some cases,
the same dentist has been listed twice with two different ratings on DrOogle site. Similar
errors are also found in Yelp site. More interestingly, the same dentist has been rated and
ranked differently amongst various reviews sites, how can that be combined as a federated
reviews or ranking?

The HSNs have changed the way both health professionals and patients communicate with
each other. Dental social networks have an impact on the patients‟ decisions to visit a dentist
or dental practice through the ratings and reviews from other users/patients. Besides the
positive benefits from the dental review sites such as time savings, faster access, ability to
collaborate and advertisements, there are some potential negative impacts to both sides. From
time to time lawsuits have been filed in the US due to the negative reviews on these sites for
dentists. Some dentists are trying to silence their critics by using legal system in the US
(Mascagni 2012). People have been raising the voice via blogs and articles about how the
reviews are flawed (Connelly 2012) despite the HSNs claiming to be flawless. Due to such
issues, it is for sure that the dentists have to be aware of the possible danger, so do the
patients. If not managed properly one bad interaction may jeopardize the dentist‟s reputation.
Therefore, it is important for the dental profession to get involved in dental social network
design and management. Dental associations and other regulatory bodies should be involved
in the process of designing recommendation systems that are suitable for dentists and dental






                                                                                          187
        Social Networking and Dental Care: State of the Art and Analysis of the Impact on Dentists ...



practices. In addition, other challenges such as anonymous user identity, cold start problem
when new dentist is added, or when there is a unique dental situation. Finding a solution to
these challenges needs the involvement of researchers, patients and dental health
professionals.

References

Armfield, J.M. (2010). The extent and nature of dental fear and phobia in Australia.
      Australian Dental Journal. Vol. 55. Issue 4. pp. 368-377.
Armfield, J.M., Slade, G.D. and Spencer, A.J. (2009). Dental fear and adult oral health in
      Australia. Community Dentistry and Oral Epidemiology. Vol. 37. Issue 3. pp. 220-230.
Armitage, C. J. and Reidy, J.G. (2012). Evidence that process simulations reduce anxiety in
      patients receiving dental treatment: randomized exploratory trial. Anxiety, Stress &
      Coping: An International Journal, 25:2. pp. 155-165.

Beirne, P., Clarkson, J.E. and Worthington, J.V.(2008). Recall Intervals for oral health in
      primary care patients (Review). The Cochrane Collaboration. The Cochrane Library.
      Issue 4.
Connelly, T.P. (2012). Flawed: Consumer Review Sites for Dentists and Physicians.
      Huffington Post, from <http://www.huffingtonpost.com/thomas-p-connelly-
      dds/medical-consumer-reviews_b_1132262.html>
Dental Fear Central (2013). Dental Fear Central –  the world‟s biggest Dental Phobia, Dental

      Fear and Dental Anxiety Resources, United Kingdom, accessed 5 February 2013.
      <www.dentalfearcentral.org>.
DrOogle (2013). DrOogle Good Dentist Guide, Dentist Reviews, Dentist Ratings and
      Recommendations, USA, accessed 28 February 2013, <http://www.doctoroogle.com>.
Elgin, C.R. (2012). Factors Affecting Patient Selection of an Orthodontic Practice. Ohio State
      University. Dentistry.
Gallant L.M., Irizarry, C., Boone, G and Kreps, G.L. (2011). Promoting participatory

      medicine with social media: New media applications on hospital websites that enhance
      health education and e-patients voices. Journal of Participatory Medicine, Vol.3.
Hedman, E., Ringberg, K. and Gabre, P. (2009). Oral health education for school children: a
      qualitative study of dental care professionals‟ view of knowledge and learning. Journal
      of Dental Hygiene. Vol. 7. Issue 7. pp. 204-211.
Hernández-Ortega, B. 2011, 'The role of post-use trust in the acceptance of a technology:
      Drivers and consequences', Technovation.

Hou, J., Shim, M. (2010). The Role of Provider–  Patient Communication and Trust in Online
      Sources in Internet Use for Health-Related Activities. In: Journal of Health
      Communication. vol. 15, no. S3,  pp. 186-99.
Ito, A., Hayashi, M., Hamasaki, T. and Ebisu, S. (2012). How Regular Visits and Preventive
      Programs Affect Onset of Adult Caries. Journal of Dental Research. Vol. 91. No. 7.pp.
      S52-s58.

Kwan, M. & Ramachandran, D. (2009). Trust and online reputation systems. Computing with
      Social Trust, pp. 287-311.
Lee, R. (2012). The rise of the e-patient, understanding social networks and online health
      information seeking. Pew Internet Project, Pew Research Center.
Lober, W.B. and Flowers, J.L. (2011). Consumer empowerement in health care amid the
      internet and social media. Seminars in Oncology Nursing. Vol 27. No 3. pp. 169-182.






                                                                                            188
                                                        Sojen Pradhan, Valerie Gay, Surya Nepal



Luo, J.S. & Smith, B.N. (2011). Social Networking, Health 2.0, and Beyond. Information
      Technology Essentials for Behavioral Health Clinicians, pp. 119-31.
Mascagni, E. (2012). SLAPP-Happy Dentists: When Lawsuits are Used to Fight Bad Yelp!
      Reviews. Policymic.com, from < http://www.policymic.com/articles/2746/slapp-happy-
      dentists-when-lawsuits-are-used-to-fight-bad-yelp-reviews/category_list>
McNeil, D.W., Helfer, A.J., Weaver, B.D., Graves, R.W., Kyle, B.N. and Davis, A.M. (2011).

      Memory of Pain and Anxiety Associated with Tooth Extraction. Journal of Dental
      Research. Vol. 90. pp. 220-224.
Moturu, S. & Liu, H. (2010). Quantifying the Trustworthiness of Social Media Content:
      Content Analysis for the Social Web, LAP Lambert Academic Publishing.
Ng, S.K.S. and Leung, W.K. (2008). A community study on relationship of dental anxiety
      with oral health status and oral health-related quality of life. Community Dentistry and
      Oral Epidemiology. Vol. 36. Issue 4. pp. 347-356.

Perea-Perez, B., Santiago-Saez, A., Garcia-Marin, M., Labajo-Gonzalez, E. and Villa-Vigil,
      A. (2011). Patient safety in dentistry: Dental care risk management plan. Med Oral
      Patol Oral Cir Bucal. Sep 1;16(6). Pp. e805-9.
Ratzan, S.C. (2011). Our New “Social” Communication Age in Health. Journal of Health
      Communication. vol. 16, no. 8, pp. 803-4.
Rodriguez-Vazquez, L. M., Lopez, E. R., Centelles, A. V., Otero, A.I.B. Otero, F. V. and
      Centelles, P. V. (2008). Stress amongst primary dental care patients. Med Oral Patol

      Oral Cir Buscal, April 1. 13(4), E:253-6.
Sbaraini, A., Carter, S.M. and Evans, R.W. (2012). Experiences of dental care: What do
      patients value? BMC Health Services Research. 12:177
Swan, M. (2009). Emerging patient-driven health care models: an examination of health
      social networks, consumer personalized medicine and quantified self-tracking.
      International journal of environmental research and public health, vol. 6, no. 2,p. 492-
      525.

Swan, M. (2012). Crowdsourced health research studies: an important emerging complement
      to clinical trials in the public health research ecosystem. Journal of Medical Internet
      Research, Vol 14, No.2.
The Dentist Reviews (2013). The Dentist Reviews: All Reviews –     All the time. Accessed 5
      Feb 2013. <www.thedentistreviews.com>.
Tustin, N. (2010). The role of patient satisfaction in online health information seeking',
      Journal of Health Communication, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 3-17.

Yarascavitch, C., Regehr, G., Hodges, B. and Haas, D.A. (2009). Changes in Dental Student
      Empathy During Training. Journal of Dental Education. Vol. 73. No. 4. pp. 509-517.

















                                                                                            189