                                                 UniversityofKentucky
                                                     UKnowledge

ThesesandDissertations--Geography                            Geography



2014

THEHUMAN–HOOKWORM

ASSEMBLAGE:CONTINGENCYANDTHE
PRACTICEOFHELMINTHICTHERAPY

SophiaAnneStrosberg
UniversityofKentucky,sophiastrosberg@gmail.com


















RecommendedCitation
Strosberg,SophiaAnne,"THEHUMAN–HOOKWORMASSEMBLAGE:CONTINGENCYANDTHEPRACTICEOF
HELMINTHICTHERAPY"(2014).ThesesandDissertations--Geography.Paper21.
http://uknowledge.uky.edu/geography_etds/21

ThisMaster'sThesisisbroughttoyouforfreeandopenaccessbytheGeographyatUKnowledge.IthasbeenacceptedforinclusioninThesesand
Dissertations--GeographybyanauthorizedadministratorofUKnowledge.Formoreinformation,pleasecontactUKnowledge@lsv.uky.edu.
STUDENTAGREEMENT:

Irepresentthatmythesisordissertationandabstractaremyoriginalwork.Properattributionhasbeen
giventoalloutsidesources.IunderstandthatIamsolelyresponsibleforobtaininganyneededcopyright

permissions.Ihaveobtainedneededwrittenpermissionstatement(s)fromtheowner(s)ofeachthird-
partycopyrightedmattertobeincludedinmywork,allowingelectronicdistribution(ifsuchuseisnot
permittedbythefairusedoctrine)whichwillbesubmittedtoUKnowledgeasAdditionalFile.

IherebygranttoTheUniversityofKentuckyanditsagentstheirrevocable,non-exclusive,androyalty-
freelicensetoarchiveandmakeaccessiblemyworkinwholeorinpartinallformsofmedia,nowor
hereafterknown.Iagreethatthedocumentmentionedabovemaybemadeavailableimmediatelyfor
worldwideaccessunlessanembargoapplies.

Iretainallotherownershiprightstothecopyrightofmywork.Ialsoretaintherighttouseinfuture
works(suchasarticlesorbooks)allorpartofmywork.IunderstandthatIamfreetoregisterthe

copyrighttomywork.

REVIEW,APPROVALANDACCEPTANCE
Thedocumentmentionedabovehasbeenreviewedandacceptedbythestudent’sadvisor,onbehalfof

theadvisorycommittee,andbytheDirectorofGraduateStudies(DGS),onbehalfoftheprogram;we
verifythatthisisthefinal,approvedversionofthestudent’sthesisincludingallchangesrequiredbythe
advisorycommittee.Theundersignedagreetoabidebythestatementsabove.

                                                             SophiaAnneStrosberg,Student

                                                       Dr.J.AnthonyStallins,MajorProfessor
                                              Dr.PatriciaEhrkamp,DirectorofGraduateStudies
           THE HUMAN–HOOKWORM ASSEMBLAGE:

CONTINGENCY AND THE PRACTICE OF HELMINTHIC THERAPY


               _________________________________

                             THESIS
               _________________________________


           A thesis submitted in partial fulfillment of the
         requirements for the degree of Master of Arts in the
                   College of Arts and Sciences
                   at the University of Kentucky









                               By
                      Sophia Anne Strosberg

                       Lexington, Kentucky

                  Director: Dr. J. Anthony Stallins
                       Lexington, Kentucky

                              2014

                Copyright © Sophia Strosberg 2014













                              0
                                 ABSTRACT





                THE HUMAN–HOOKWORM ASSEMBLAGE:
     CONTINGENCY AND THE PRACTICE OF HELMINTHIC THERAPY


   Through a qualitative analysis of the use of intestinal parasites for treating
immune system disorders, this research illustrates how contingency emerges in
the context of the human relationship to hookworms. The affect of the human–
nonhuman relationship is an important part of understanding the direction of
evolutionary medicine today, and has implications for the politics of biological
health innovations. The shift from the bad parasite to a parasite that at least
sometimes heals, discursively and materially, has opened new spaces for patients
to change the way they relate to medical knowledge, medical professionals, and
pharmaceutical companies. Hookworms are banned by the FDA, which sets the

scene for lively, but sometimes rebellious, hybridity between host and parasite.
Underground and do-it-yourself hookworm therapy cultures have sprung up in
around the site of the gut. I argue that not only is material hookworm affect as
important as human discourses in negotiating the rapidly advancing field of
biome reconstruction, but it also plays a role in how that biome reconstruction
takes place, conventionally or otherwise.

KEYWORDS: assemblage, contingency, health geography, helminthic therapy,
microbiome








                                                   Sophia Anne Strosberg

                                                        8 May 2014
           THE HUMAN–HOOKWORM ASSEMBLAGE:

CONTINGENCY AND THE PRACTICE OF HELMINTHIC THERAPY
                               By

                         Sophia Strosberg


















                                       Dr. J. Anthony Stallins
                                                       Director of Thesis



                                       Dr. Patricia Ehrkamp
                                             Director of Graduate Studies


                                                 8 May 2014
                                                                 Date








                              0
                             ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
   Thank you first to Tony Stallins, not just for hissupport in the thesis process

and for reading all those half-finished drafts, but for always being ready to
experiment and generate new ideas together. I couldn’t have done it without Tad
Mutersbaugh and Anna Secor, my committee members, as well as the other
professors who read through my work, listened to my ideas, encouraged me, and
kept me on my toes. Thanks to Dr. Shannon for his humor, technical knowledge,
and everything else. Thanks to Lori Tyndall and the other university staff. Also,
thanks to the Mezzanine crew for keeping all of us fed, even on the hectic days.
   Anyone who has been to grad school in social science knows that you can’t
do it without fellow students. There are simply too many people to list them here
individually, but three groups should get special acknowledgement: my grad

student cohort, my officemates, and the wonderful people at Ham Palace.
   Thanks to all of those who willingly (and unwillingly) hashed through topics
lofty and otherwise, even—or perhaps, especially—when we disagreed.
   Leif Johnson, B Miller, Carrie Ann Welsh, Stefanie Wolf, the Oakland
warehouse, the Brooklyn warehouse—the people I’ve lived with will know the
enormous role they have played in my getting to and through this work.
   My family has been wonderful: Jeff Strosberg, for helping me put things in
perspective; Marilyn Strosberg, for always lending an ear; Jack Moss, for sharing
your passion for care; Benjamin, for philosophizing with me; and Vivian, my
amazing sister, confidant, and friend. T hanks in particular to Lillian Moss, my

mother, with whom I know I can always have long and honest conversations
about materiality, affect, liveliness, possibility, and medicine. She gave me the
drive to question and the tools with which to do so.
   Thanks to all of my patient interviewees, who took the time to chat with me,
sometimes for more than an hour, about their personal experiences with
helminths and disease. Their insights will always be invaluable, and should
never be overlooked.
























                                       iii
                    TABLE OF CONTENTS


Acknowledgments……………………………………………….......………………….ii

List of Figures……………………...……………………………………….…………...vi
Notes on Terminology………………………………………………………………...vii



Chapter One: Introduction ………………..…………………...……………..………..1


Chapter Two: Background………………..…………………………………………….4

     Autoimmune disease on the rise…………..…………………………………..4
     Evolutionary medicine…………….……………………………………………4

     Helminthic therapy………………………………..…………………………...10

     Crohn’s disease and hookworm.………………..…………………………11
     Parasite pirates…………………………………………………………………13



Chapter Three: Theory and Methods……………..………………………………… 15
  Theory

     Assemblage………….………………………………………………………….15
     Affect…………………………………………………………………………….16

     Materiality………………………………………………………………………17

     Research questions.………………….……………………..…………………..20
     Question One: How do humans learn to be affected by

     hookworms?.………………………………………………
..…………………..21

     Question Two: Which aspects of hookworm therapy aidincorporation
     into institutional medicine, and which hinder incorporation?…….......…..23



  Methods
     Epistemology……………………………………………………..…………….25

     Online Ethnographies………………………………………...………………. 27

     Interviews with helminthic therapy patients.……………………………… 27
     Interviews with both informal and institutional medical

     researchers, providers, and journalists ………………………………..…….29

     Data collection and analysis…………………………………………………..31


                            iv
     Rigor and reliability.……………………….………………………………….31


Chapter Four: How Humans Learn to Be Affected by Hookworms………..……34

  0. The phase between the hookworms: separation………………….…………34
  1. Turning toward the helminth………………………………………………….37

  2. Overcoming the “yuck” factor……………………………………...………….41

  3. Acquiring helminths, facing the law……………………………………..……45
  4. Contact, mutual conditioning, and the production of difference……..……49

  5. Conclusion……………………………………………………………………….52


Chapter Five: How Hookworms Become a Part of Institutional Medical

Practice—Or Evade It………………………….………………………………………54

  Hookworm Aids Incorporation………………………………………………….54
     Hookworm bodies subsumed……………….……………………………….54

     Hybrid experiments……………………………………...…………………….56

  Hookworm Discourages Incorporation………………………………………….62


Chapter Six: Discussion……………………………….……………………………….67


Appendix…………………………………………………………….………………….74

References…………...………………...……….……………………………………….75
Vita…………………………………………………        
 ………………...………………….86





















                           v
                          LIST OF FIGURES


Figure 1, Some of the many news headlines

   about biome restoration with parasites*……….……………………………….…5


Figure 2, A sampling of the known immunomodulatory effects of helminths…...7


Figure 3, Inverse relationship between

   autoimmune disease and helminths……..………………………….….…………9


Figure 4, Inverse relationship between infectious

   diseases and immune disorders……..………………………….….……………...9


Figure 5, The aesthetic charisma of the

   hookworm………….………..………………………….….………………………22


Figure 6, List of all patient interviewees*…………..……………….……………….28


Figure 7, Greg shows me his hookworm

   rash*……………………….………………..………………………….….…..…….45


Figure 8, Screenshot from Crohnology.com……….….…………….………………61




                                                     *created by author
















                                 vi
                          NOTES ON TERMINOLOGY


   I use the term “helminth” to denote parasiticworms that live in other animal

hosts. I use “helminthic therapy” to denote a therapy that uses helminths as
treatment rather than “helminth therapy,” which usually implies the emilination

of a helminth infection.

   I use common names for specific helminth types. The three types that most
helminthic therapy research focuses on are Necator americanus(one of two human

hookworm varieties),Trichuris suis (pig whipworm), and Trichuris trichiura

(human whipworm). In literature on helminthic therapy, the latter two are
commonly appended with “ova” and called TSO and TTO, respectively. All three

are in the Nematoda, or roundworm, phylum.

   The terms “hookworm” and “hookworms” are not interchangeable.
“Hookworm” denotes an individual hookworm body, or else is used as a noun

adjunct, as in “hookworm treatment.” “Hookworms” implies the multiplicity of

hookworm affects that emerge throughout their relationships with other bodies,
environments, institutions, and discourses.

   In an effort to be as honest as possible, I occasionally use the word “subjects”
(not “participants”) to refer to the people I am studying, especially when I wish

to include both interviewees and online helminth users. This project, like many

other social science projects, still subjectifies the people it studies. While all
research subjects are in some way participants, most scholarly research sets up a

dichotomy between researcher and researched, creating uneven subjectivities

that I wish to acknowledge.

















                                        vii
                       CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION


   Immune system disorders have risen sharply in recent years. This category of

medical conditions includes autoimmune and inflammatory diseases, in which
the body’s immune cells attack its own tissues, and allergic and asthmatic

reactions, in which the immune system reacts to harmless substances as if they

were pathogenic intruders. Immunosuppressant drugs are available, but the
emerging method of biome restoration may prove both safer and more effective

at treating immune system disorders (Parker et al. 2012). The etiology of this

growing problem may partly be our modern, hyper-hygienic lives—we
experience fewer deaths from infection today, but immune disorders may be the

cost. Biome restoration is the idea that if we can tone down human hygiene in the

right ways—perhaps through the addition of low-impact parasites—we can
overcome some of these diseases.

   Helminthic (parasite) therapy is a non -traditional medical treatment that uses

hookworms and other intestinal parasites that are, elsewhere, considered a
devastating health problem, as a form of biome restoration, in the hope of

modulating the immune system for those with chronic immune disorders. This
study focuses on the use of hookworms to treat Crohn’s disease, an immune

disorder of the lower digestive tract. The presence of hookworms in a Crohn’s

patient often calms the extreme inflammation associated with the disease.
Hookworms are set apart from other parasites in that they are not contagious on

contact and reproduce in soil, not the human body. Further, their pathology is

often minimal or nonexistent.
   Once helminths were recognized by patients and entrepreneurs as valuable

treatment, the FDA stepped in, classifying them as biological drugs, and

effectively banning their sales and distribution. It was only 100 years ago that
they were endemic in the US South, and considered a setback to US economic

and social development. Today, patients face not just anti-helminth laws, but

also a hefty price tag—about $3,000 plus a plane ticket overseas—and a strong
“yuck” factor. Despite these concerns, perhapsthousands of individuals in the

US have managed to obtain the worms, seeking them overseas, or else producing

them for self, friends, and family from their own supplies.


                                        1
   I will use three convergent concepts—assemblage, affect, and materiality—to
explore the medicalized human–helminth relationship. Each concept builds off

the other two, and they often appear together in recent geography literature (H.

Lorimer 2008; J. Lorimer 2007; Whatmore and Hinchliffe 2010; Braun 2008;
Bingham and Hinchliffe 2008; McCormack 2007; Greenhough 2012). An

assemblage is a grouping of interconnected elements that emphasizes the

relations between the elements rather than the elements themselves.
   No assemblage functions by the agency of individually articulated elements.

Rather, material outcomes arise from the relationships between various elements

making up the assemblage. In this case, I will be exploring an assemblage
centered around humans and hookworms, but it also includes the FDA, doctors,

pharmaceutical companies and pharmaceuticals, and the chemical interactions

between animal bodies. Affect can be described as the forces that move along
these relationship lines. It is a response, event, or action stripped of its

representational qualities, and instead pertains to the material relationship

between two elements. Finally, I emphasize materiality because of the limits of
exploring the human–hookworm relationship from a purely constructivist

perspective. A purely constructivist account of the human–hookworm
relationship, one in which people’s reactions to hookworms become predictable

based on social representations of them, creates a static reality inwhich only

humans with the power to write the script may play a causative role, while a
world full of the contingency of emerging performances and affective

relationships (Stallins 2012; Barad 2003) implies that any given party, human or

non-human, can shape an outcome. In this case, assemblage can account for how
patients with autoimmune disease may take the reigns in health practice with the

knowledge that medical science is not written in stone, or even written at all.

   My thesis addresses two questions relevant to autoimmune disease in today’s
changing world. First, how do humans learn to be affected by hookworms? In

addition to establishing that affect exists in the human–hookworm relationship, I

explain how that affect unfolds, using the concept of learningto be affected. I
review how this relationship produces material results, including differences

within a single species—as in how hookworms sometimes render people sick,

and other times render them well.


                                         2
   Second, which aspects of hookworm therapy aid incorporation into
institutional medicine, and which hinder incorporation? I pose this question in

order to explore the multifarious directions that relationships with hookworms—

or more generally, any given human–non-human relationship—can take. I
explore ways that hookworms in particular interact with institutional medical

operations, in some ways augmenting them and in other ways coaxing medicine

in another, non-institutional direction. My results allow me to make an impact
statement about the use of hookworm in medical practice.

   I used a mixed-methods approach to triangulate answers to these questions.

First, a descriptive narrative drawn from literature on hookworms, helminthic
therapy, and biome depletion provides context for my questions. Second, audio-

recorded, semi-structured interviews with Crohn’s disease patients, doctors,

helminth providers, journalists, and other medical personnel conducted
primarily in New York City and the San Francisco Bay area gave me access to

both emotive accounts and insider information on the topic. Finally, online

ethnographies of hookworm users and message board analysis allowed me
access to a large amount of primary written information on hookworm therapy

and its culture. Baxter and Eyels (1996) write about what makes research
credible, dependable, confirmable, and transferable. In order to yield the most

useful and trustworthy thesis research, I followed their guidelines in selecting

research subjects and collecting and analyzing data.
   This project is anchored in two geographic subdisciplines, political ecology

and science and technology studies. It engages theoretical concerns from these

areas to articulate an opinion about the place of helminthic therapies in medicine,
shed some light on complex political entanglement s in medical treatment, and

explore the experience of do-it-yourself medicine. It also creates a picture of the

assemblage of humans and nonhumans involved in the issue of autoimmune
disease. Because the role of the parasite itself is potentially unstable,this research

brings up questions about uneven access in the field of health. Finally, this thesis

will further our understanding of human–animal interactions and the
commodification of nature through interrogation of some of the perceived

fundamentals ofbiological and social scientific ontologies.




                                        3
CHAPTER TWO: BACKGROUND


   Autoimmune disorders on the rise.About 3 percent of the world population

has at least one autoimmune disorder (Youinou et al. 2010). According to the
National Institutes of Health (2012), up to 23.5 million people in the US—one in

13—are suffering from autoimmune disorders today, including Crohn’s disease,

ulcerative colitis, Hashimoto’s disease, Sjogren’s syndrome, and multiple
sclerosis. The American Autoimmune Related Diseases Association (AARDA)

(n.d.) estimates the numbers at more than double that. Millions more are dealing

with asthma and allergies (Goldmutz and Penn 2010). Historical and spatial
variances in reporting procedures notwithstanding (Bach 2002), the numbers of

immune disorder cases is rising, according to studies in geoepidemiology (Logan

and Bowlus 2010; Youinou et al. 2010; see also Strachan 1989; Beggs 2004; Hadley
2006; Parker et al. 2012). In other words, the problem is not with under-reporting.

Additionally, some disorders previously considered unrelated to the immune

system, such as autism and depression, are now being explored as such
(Velasquez-Manoff 2012; Thompson 2013). Despite this growing urgency,

progress in clinical immunology has been slow (Parker et a l. 2012). The
traditional method of research in immunology has been molecular analysis of

how the immune system works. The corresponding therapy is prescription drugs

that suppress the immune system. These drugs constitute a multi-billion-dollar
market (Mozeson and Shakhnovich 2013).

   Evolutionary medicine. It is difficult to pin down underlying causes for the

rise in immune system disorders because epidemiology is largely inductive
rather than deductive. There are various proposals: Hadley (2006) points to

changes in food manufacturing and consumption practices in a study on food

allergens. Beggs (2004) explores the possibility that global climate change is
affecting ragweed and mold allergies. But many researchers are focused on

another correlation, the link found between immune system disorders and

industrialized, modernized regions with better sanitation, stricter hygiene, and
more processed amenities for consumption (Logan and Bowlus 2010; Youinou et

al. 2010; Parker et al. 2012; Koloski et al. 2008).




                                        4
    The biome depletion theory, also known as the hygiene hypothesis and the
“old friends” theory, may provide answers (Parker et al. 2012; Hadley 2004;

Strachan 1989). If true, these theories imply that it’s our very hygiene—our lack

of microbes and parasites—that is causing this rise in the prevalence of immune

system disorders. If true, researchers, clinicians, and patients may wish to turn to

a corresponding treatment: biome restoration, which may prove safer and more
effective than conventional immunosuppressants (Parker et al. 2012; Pollan 2013;

Bilbo et al. 2011).

    Broadly, if biome depletion means that we are missing old microbes and

macrobes from our environment (and thus, inevitably, from all parts of our

bodies, mouth to gut to spinal cord), biome restoration is the equivalent of

“rewilding” these places and reintroducing microbes and macrobes. L. bacillus is
one that we’ve all heard of from yogurt, but some speculation asks about

restoring H. pylori (which causes ulcers) and even the herpes simplex virus

(Velasquez-Manoff 2012). However, much of the media fanfare about biome

restoration is focused on the location of the gut (see figure 1).


                 The New York Times: “Can hookworms protect against allergies?”

                 (Svoboda 2008)

                        Daily Mail: “Parasitic worms offer hope of cure for
                        multiple sclerosis” (Whitelocks 2012)

                 The Scientist: “Can Worms Alleviate Autism?” (Richards 2012)

                        Wired: “Parasites, Modern Life and Immune Systems
                        Gone Haywire” (Keim 2012)


                 The Guardian: “Gut instinct: the Miracle of the Parasitic
                 Hookworm” (Adams 2010)

                        NPR: “Eat Your Worms: The Upside of Parasites”
                        (Hamilton 2010)


     Figure 1. Some of the many news headlines about biome restoration with parasites.


    According to biome restoration, if we can restore the microbial ecosystem of

the human digestive tract to be closer to way it was throughout the last two

million years of human evolution, we might treat or even prevent these immune



                                           5
disorders. Bacteria (McFall-Ngai et al. 2013; Pennisi 2013; Pollan 2013), helminths
(Parker et. al 2012; Bilbo et al. 2011; Walk et al. 2010; Broadhurst et al. 2012), and

even viruses (Pennisi 2010; Barton et al. 2007) may all beneficially shape the

human immune system. The exact methods by which helminths and other
internal organisms treat and prevent immune disorders (and possibly other

chronic diseases) is still uncertain, but generally it works like this: Humans hand

these organismsthe job of immunomodulation (regulating the strength of human
immune system reactions). This is an energy-saving measure that ensures them a

hospitable and yet secure and well-functioning home: a balance between a robust

human immune response and one that doesn’t accidentally damage our own
tissues or the parasites within us. The approach point to a growing emphasis on

evolutionary biology in medicine (Gorelick 2004; Thomas, Daoust, and Raymond

2012; Nesse et al. 2009). Our health must be viewed in the context of evolved
ecologies.

    Parker et al. (2012) point to four pieces of evidence for the connection

between biome depletion (helminth loss in particular) and autoimmune disease.
First, helminths produce molecules that calm immune response and stimulate

our own immune regulator cells. Parasites as diverse as worms and th e human
immunodeficiency virus have been found to downregulate our T-cell (immune

cell) responses (Sher et al. 1992), and further research has uncovered some of the

specific chemicals that are responsible for this in helminth infections (Hewitson
et al. 2009; see figure 2).





















                                         6
       Hewitson et al. (2009). the known immunomodulatory effects of helminths. From


    Second, according to Parker et al., humans rely on helminths for

immunomodulatory function almost as much as helminths rely on humans for

habitat. Humans have lived with helminths since before Homo sapiens were a
distinct species. At the time, we lived in small, scattered groups that could not

sustain a large population loss, so it was in the helminths’ evolutionary interest

to remain relatively benign. The result was a compromise: helminths would take
on the task of keeping our immune system from over- or under-reacting to

stimuli—including helminth infections. According to Velasquez -Manoff, human-

dwelling parasites


    altered our immune function the way that atmospheric oxygen modified our
    lungs or dry land our limbs. This is to say, much of our immune system
    evolved precisely to manage the problem of parasites. They constituted a
    dominant feature of the landscape in which we evolved (2012, 23).


Bilbo et al. write,



                                          7
   The evolutionary origin of jawed fishes more than 400million years ago
   marked not only the appearance of immune systems containing all of the
   major components found in humans, but also presumably provided suitable
   vertebrate hosts for flatworm parasites. Although it remains unknown when
   in evolutionary history helminths took up residence in the vertebrate gut,
   several lines of evidence point toward helminths residing in the guts of

   vertebrates more than 100million years ago (2011, 495).

   Today’s wild primates are teeming with parasites. We may have picked up

worms from our time on the savanna—human tapeworms diverged from felid,

canid, and hyena tapeworms, not domesticated animals’ tapeworms. That
divergence happened 1 million to 2.5 million years ago, just as the genus Homo

began to emerge, and long before the practice of animal domestication—in short,
we may have given tapeworms to pigs, and not the other way around

(Velasquez-Manoff 2012). The biome depletion theory points to our rapid shift

away from this long-evolved state of cohabitation as a main factor in the rise of
non-infectious immune-related problems. Whether through sterilized water

sources, antibiotics, modern plumbing, refrigeration, anti-parasite education, or

helminth treatment campaigns, industrialization and the hygiene movement has
greatly reduced our microbial and macrobial internal biodiversity.

   Third, immigrants moving from pre- to post-industrial societies have higher

rates of autoimmune disease and allergies. This has been noted in studies from
Hawaii, New Zealand, and Israel (Trowell and Burkitt 1981), though this could

be due to any number of factors, such as changes in diet or fetal developmental

conditions, as well as microbiome diversity (Bickler and DeMaio 2008).
   Fourth, the geographic prevalence of helminth infection has an inverse

relationship with the prevalence of immune system disorders (see figures 3 and

4). The geographies of helminth infection versus immune disorders is closely
correlatedwith industrialization and hygiene factors, with more industrialized

and urban areas featuring both fewer helminth infections and greater immune

disorders (Bach 2002; Bilbo et al. 2011; Kondrashova et al. 2013).








                                         8
   Figure 3. An inverse relationship exi sts for regions of the world experiencing high
   rates of autoimmune disorder and those with higher incidences of helminth infestation.
   From the web page of Coronado Bioscience (n.d.).

























   Figure 4. A similar inverse relationship between the incidence of p rototypical infectious
   diseases (panel A) and the incidence of immune disorders (panel B). From Bach (2002).



    However, for Parker et al. (2012), as for Okada et al. (2010), the proof of

principle is in biome restoration experimentation, where helminthic t herapy,

fecal matter transplants (transfer of microbe-rich feces from one human to

another) and other human biome treatments such as leeches, are tried on animals

and humans with a significant (but inconclusive) degree of success. Examples
include a study on human multiple sclerosis (Correale and Farez 2007), human



                                            9
skin exacerbation (Flohr et al. 2006), human Crohn’s disease (Summers et al.
2005; Croese et al. 2006), and rat diabetes (Like, Guberski, and Butler 1991).

Experiments are ongoing, and will be explored below.

   The coevolution of humans and their microbial and parasitic landscapes has
come to light in geographic thought already. Scott, Robbins, and Comrie (2012)

believe this topic calls for an interdisciplinary alliance between physical, medical,

environmental, social and political geographies. In order to better understand
how diseases work, they think that we need to begin to look deeply at the co-

evolutionary relationships between species and the effects of institutional

interventions, as well as the usual elements of habitat, exposure, and risk. We can
view this not just on the macro scale, with world maps and geoempidemiology,

but also on a micro scale, where some researchers are trying to understand the

actual differences between animals with and without a helminth infection
(Okada et al. 2010).

   My assemblage-style intervention especially emphasizes the importance of

looking into human–pathogen relationships and the differences they produce.
My work will add a specific case study to this literature in order to demonstrate

the mechanisms by which the results of this microbial and parasitic coevolution
with humans play out in the highly politicized field of modern medicine.

   Helminthic therapy. The hygiene infrastructure and practices that follow

industrialization haven’t depleted internal biodiversity around the world. Two
billion people still carry at least one of three major helminthic parasites:

hookworm, whipworm, and giant roundworm (Despommier 2013). These

worms are regularly battled by develop ment and humanitarian organizations
with an arsenal of awareness campaigns, shoe provisions, latrine building, and

pharmaceutical anthelminthic drugs (USAID 2012a). Currently, 500 million

people are treated each year with preventative anthelminthic drugs alone (World
Health Organization 2010).

   However, helminths are now being seen as palliative as well as pathogen, as

helminthic therapy stands to become an effective form of biome restoration. It is
where helminthic parasites are no longer a major public health concern that they

are used for treatment of immune disease. Treatment involves inoculating a

patient with a specific number of helminthic worms orally or topically


                                         10
(depending on the organism). They eventually land in the small or large

intestine, where they interact on a molecular level with the human body (Loukas
and Prociv 2001; Hewitson, Grainger, and Maizels 2009), negotiating a habitat

tolerable to the worms as well as the human. Currently, live helminths are being

tested in clinical trials by a l imited number of pharmaceutical companies
                                                    1
interested in their effectiveness and marketability (Summers et al. 2005;
Pritchard 2009; Emara 2013; Richards 2012). Some believe that the beneficial

molecules produced by parasites would be better extracted and put into a

standardized pill-type form (Okada et al. 2010; Ruyssers et al. 2008). Researches
are making advances in this extraction (Hewitson, Grainger, and Maizels 2009),

but the individual animals’ variability may make both lab experiments and a

viable, standardized, biologically derived drug difficult to reproduce (Tilp et al.
2013).

    Helminths are regulated by the FDA, and currently illegal to manufacture,

distribute, or import in the US. According to a 27 March 2014 personal email

from Hope Anderson, Consumer Safety Officer of the Center for Biologics
Evaluation and Research, a division of the FDA, if a helminth “is used to prevent,

treat or cure a human disease or condition, it would be regulated as a drug

and/or biological product” (Anderson 2014). However, the rates of success
reported in studies and anecdotally (Croese et al. 2006; Summers et al. 2005), as

well as the less-than-stellar performance of immunosuppressants (Lichtenstein et

al. 2006; D’Haens 2007), are leading many people in the US to bypass the FDA’s
years-long safety- and efficacy-testing process. They turn to informal sources

instead. A new underground economy has started, alongside a do -it-yourself

helminth culture.

    Crohn’s disease and hookworms. In this project, I focused in particular on
the use of hookworms for helminthic therapy, and in particular on Crohn’s

disease. Hookworms are one of three popular choices for helminthic therapy,

along with pig whipworms and human whipworms. They yield minimal side
effects when administered in low numbers, and when its human host is receiving

a nutritious diet (Bilbo et al. 2011). However, hookworms caused real harm to the


1
 Trials in the US are searchable on http://www.clinicaltrials.gov.


                                          11
health of rural Southerners in the US in the nineteenth century (Brown 1976). In
some places in Africa and Asia, severe hookworm infections still couple with

malnourishment to cause serious physical, mental, and, according to aid

institutions, economic problems (Hotez et al. 2006; USAID 2012b). The
contradictions between hookworm as disease and hookworm as medicine

illustrate how the contingencies of place and materiality interact to shape the

medical and political meaning of the hookworm. In the US, a country that had an
endemic hookworm population 100 years ago, autoimmune patients are

forbidden from selling and importing (or, effectively, from obtaining) helminths

as medicine, and must either fly abroad to get them, receive them from a fellow
patient, or purposely cultivate them at home (“FDA Import Alert” 57-21 2011).

They are not recommended by doctors or television advertisements.

   The presence of the hookworms in a Crohn’s patient often, to some degree,
calms the amount of inflammation experienced, though the exact mechanisms of

immunomodulation in the disease are not yet understood (Okada et al. 2010;

Maizels and Nussey 2013; Despommier 2013). Crohn’s is an autoimmune disease
of the digestive tract. It is a disease that affects young, health individuals, with it

most commonly beginning in individuals between the ages of 15 and 30. It is part
of the family of inflammatory bowel diseases, which affects 1.4 million people in

the United States alone (Loftus 2004). According to the Centers for Disease

Control and Prevention (CDC) (2011), Crohn’s causes ulcers to erupt along the
intestinal wall, and can result in severe pain, dysent ery, malnutrition, anemia,

and intestinal obstruction. Crohn’s may be treated with careful dietary

restrictions, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, steroids,
immunosuppressants, or iron infusions. Each treatment has varying success

rates. The CDC (2011) further states that two-thirds of patients will eventually

need some kind of surgery, since the drugs often eventually stop working. This
may mean either getting sections of the intestine removed or colostomy. Each

treatment, save dietary changes, yields a full spectrum of mild to severe side

effects. For some people, the side effects become barely tolerable, and there is a
relatively common fear of rare cancers and infections resulting from the stronger

treatments. Sites like the CDC’s never list mortality as a prognosis, but some

people with Crohn’s disease certainly do blame Crohn’s, its medications, and the


                                         12
associated weakened immune systems, when friends die young because of
diseases like pneumonia.

   Parasite pirates. Once patients and entrepreneurs recognized helminths as a

viable treatment, they became a commodity for sale, and once they became a
commodity, the FDA stepped in. In 2009, helminths were ruled by the FDA to be

a biological pharmaceutical drug. At the time that this distinction was made, t he

US was hosting ongoing clinical trials of pig whipworm and at least one
unregulated company selling whipworm and hookworm. The unregulated

company, now called Autoimmune Therapies, was run by Jasper Lawrence. The

FDA promptly raided his house after theruling. He now sells helminthic therapy
from the United Kingdom.

   Lawrence is often touted as the first do-it-yourselfer in helminthic therapy.

He is not trained as a doctor; rather, he sought out hookworms after hearing
about the therapy from his aunt. After a bit of research, he landed on the hygiene

hypothesis. He decided to acquire hookworms the old-fashioned way—by

mucking around in human feces near a designated bathroom area (in his case, in
Cameroon). Lawrence’s debilitating allergies and asthma were suddenly better,

and he was able to completely stop his prednisone steroid treatments. Further,
the side-effects of hookworm treatment were minimal. He began selling his own,

self-produced stock of hookworms out of his home by 2006, and continued

distribution for three years before the FDA raid (Adams 2010). After the raid, his
choices were to shut down the distribution or leave the country, so he left.

Patients like Lawrence’s must now smuggle hookworms into the United States

from Autoimmune Therapies or other providers abroad. This is not illegal, since
the hookworms are within the patients’ bodies during travel back to the US, and

the FDA doesn’t regulate individuals (unless they are manufacturers,

distributors, and importers). Still, it does confront both social taboos about
parasites and FDA governance, as well as raising questions about the ways in

which parasites stand to be commodified.

   Travel overseas isn’t the only way to become a “parasite pirate.” Providers
can cost from $2,000 to $4,000 out of pocket for three years guaranteed

infection—plus an international plane ticket. Some users set up home cultivation

labs so they don’t have to rely on this path. Once infected, these parasite users


                                        13
are a powerhouse of hookworm egg production—each female hookworm can lay
up to 30,000 eggs per day. Public and private social media websites allows home

cultivators to chat about hookworm reproduction and cultivation. Though rarer

in the US than in Europe because of legal issues, some individuals even become
hookworm egg donors, sharing their hookworms’ offspring with others in need

who can’t afford a multi-thousand-dollar price tag.

   Because of the complex relationships within this situation, it lends itself to
exploration as an assemblage. Hookworms and other parasitic helminths, the

intestinal biome, patients, medical practitioners, governmental agencies, and the

environment all play a role in the drama of Crohn’s disease and treatment. A
geographic exploration of this assemblage has the potential to clarify how people

engage with this lively helminthic therapy and what this engagement means for

the way helminthic therapy facilitates or resists the status quo of institutional
medicine in the US.


































                                        14
                 CHAPTER THREE: THEORY AND METHODS


    Social scientists could analyze th e contradictions related to helminthic

therapy using a range of theoretical frameworks. An uneven development angle

(Hayden 2003, Guthman 2011) would portray how parasites are promoted as a

palliative in the US and Europe even while the Gates Foundation an d countless
NGOs dedicate millions of dollars and much labor toward their eradication

(Brown 1967; World Health Organization 2013). Social constructivism (Metzl and

Kirkland 2010) would document how ideas about parasites depend upon context
(Naslund 2012), using the good-animal-versus-bad-animal motif common in

animal geography (Wolch and Emel 1998; Buller 2013). A biopolitical approach

could excavate the history of clinical and scientific medicine and the creation of
self-governing, healthy biocitizens (Foucault 1973; Foucault 2009; Metzl and

Kirkland 2010, Mansfield 2012, Rutherford and Rutherford 2013) or expand it

into a study of biosecurity (Braun 2007). Rejecting any of these theories would

limit a holistic, nuanced perspective of the human –helminth relationship.
Though not the explicit goal of my research, an assemblage-based, affective,

material account will set up a narrative through which many pieces of the

puzzle, including the above economic, constructivist, and biopolitical theories,
can be linked together.

    Assemblage. Assemblage is an interconnected field of elements in which the

relationships between the elements are more important than the elements
themselves. Robbins and Marks (2010) explore assemblage as a way to tell a

complex story and better understand how relationships between humans and

nonhumans unfold. Based on Deleuze and Guattari’s (1987) writings, an

assemblage is a network of connections in which the constituent parts—human
or nonhuman—are only important in as far as they are relating to one another.    2

Deleuze and Guattari (1987, 17-21) sum this up with the equation of assemblages

= n - 1, where “n” is always minus 1. “n” is the number of elements in an
assemblage, and “-1” means that you must always discount the subject of any

assemblage. We can see that the assemblage itself exists only as the relationships


2
 See also Bennett (2010, 23- 24) for a useful discussion of “non-totalizable” assemblage.


                                         15
between this would-be subject and many other elements, not as the causation
triggered by that subject itself. It is from this type assemblage based not upon

human subjectivity or, indeed, any subjectivity, that I draw the notion of

posthumanism into my thesis—or, perhaps better put, the postsubjective.
Everything in the world is ultimately linked; however, it is possible to delineate

parameters of a particular, smaller assemblage for the purposes of study. One

effect of the assemblage view is its undermining an anthropocentric conception
of agency and intentionality, as all parts of an assemblage contribute to any given

phenomenon.

   Affect. The second concept is affect, or the wayin which the relationship
between two bodies makes a difference to those bodies. Affects, according to H.

Lorimer, are “properties, competencies, modalities, energies, attunements,

arrangements and intensities of differing texture, temporality, velocity and
spatiality, that act on bodies, are produced through bodies and transmitted by

bodies. Our sensual worlds catalyze complexly and dissipate unexpectedly”

(2008, 2). Affect is not a property of a given subject, but rather runs along the
lines between elements that we have already established as the main content of

an assemblage. Affect, therefore, is not a given attribute, but something that is
always becoming, along with those lines of relation. We can’t look at a pre-

existing affect any more than we can look at a pre-existing subject. Affect, unlike

language, may not possess immediately decodable meaning; rather, humans and
nonhumans must “learn” to be affected. The notion of learning to be affected is

derived from William James (1890) via Vinciane Despret (1994) and Bruno Latour

(1994). From this lineage, I take “learning to be affected” to mean the process
through which two elements come to be engaged in a relationship with one

another—a relationship that is signified by its rendering the elements differ ent

from how they would have been otherwise (Whatmore and Hinchliffe 2010).
Bingham refers to Latour in studying “the process of how our bodies are

“‘effectuated’, moved, put into motion by other entities, human or nonhuman”

(2006, 489), and Latimer (2013) argues that humans learn to be affected alongside
nonhumans—the connection is situated in a context, not inherent in a

relationship.




                                        16
    Affect is a response, event, or action that is stripped of its representational
qualities. Affect can be a combination of physical and mental-emotional

pressures, and usually makes more of a difference when it is repeated over and

over. When Whatmore and Hinchliffe (2010) write about people’s everyday
relationships to urban green spaces, McCormack (2007) writes of psychotropic

drugs and neuron firings, Bingham looks at how bees, butterflies, bacteria, and

genetically modified crops interact, or J. Lorimer (2007) writes of nature
conservation due to animal charisma, they are exploring affect. Others

geographers specifically exploring affect include Hinchliffe et al. (2005), H.

Lorimer (2006), Graham and Roelvink (2010), and Anderson (2009).
    The reason I use learning to be affected rather than just beingaffected is in

order to imply that there is a temporal process, albeit an ongoing process, that

must happen before species and individuals can be affected. However, the
learning must always accompany affect because even before the affect of contact,

there is an affect of separation.

    Materiality. The third concept is materiality. A material framework insists
that social constructivism has limits, and instead takes affect into account. Social

constructivism remains a preeminent analytical tool for many geographers, but it
omits the parts of human (and nonhuman) existence that don’t entirely rest on

language, semiotics, symbols, and grammar. Constructions must still be based on

some perceived difference (Saldanha 2010; Barad 2003), and affect, itself
producing difference, provides that grounding. This difference is also a source of

contingency: “Once the body that is learning to be affected becomes articulate

in/with a new world of things then both can start to change” (Whatmore and
Hinchliffe 2010). For Bennett, following Spinoza, “The process of modification

[difference-making, mode-changing] is not under the control of any one mode –

no mode is an agent in the hierarchical sense. Neither is the process without
tension, for each mode vies with and against the (changing) affections of (a

changing set of) other modes, all the while being subject to the element of chance

or contingency intrinsic to any encounter” (2010, 22).
    A material framework doesn’t write off discourse, but rather contextualizes it

as discursive practice. Together, discursive practices and material phenomena—

both of which are performative, active, and ongoing—constitute our world.


                                         17
Haraway (2007) points out that rather than humans being cut loose from the
material world in a state of human otherness, we are becoming who we are

alongside them, in the midst of our material and emotional interdependence . She

points back to the affect of ordinary, everyday relationships, and asks us to
image what other species might be thinking as they do their part to colonize us

just as we are colonizing them. I do not take her up on thisprompt in this thesis,

but I do follow her notion of “becoming with” to the culture-saturated
microbiology of helminthic therapy.Barad’s notion that “Relata do not preexist

relations” (2003, 815) captures the element I am most trying to capture:

relationships themselves are constitutive of any individual elements in that
relationship. Barad takes this approach because representationalism inevitably

becomes trapped by its own metaphysics—one in which language is all there is

at base, and performance or relationships are simply effects of language. A
material framework made up of performed and learned affective relationships, in

contrast, points to a world that is ever becoming. It opens up “particular

possibilities for acting at every moment, and these chan ging possibilities entail a
responsibility to intervene in the world’s becoming, to contest and rework what

matters and what is excluded from mattering” (Barad 2003, 827).
    Others have already used this relationalapproach to pathogens before. Scott,

Robbins, and Comrie (2012) contend that in order to better understand how

diseases work, we need to look deeply at the co-evolutionary relationships
between species and the effects of institutional interventions as well as the usual

elements of habitat, exposure, and risk. Their assemblage-style intervention

emphasizes the importance of looking into human–pathogen relationships and
the differences they produce with illustrative case studies in bacterial and

helminth infections, West Nile virus, and the fungal in fection known as Valley

Fever. Greenhough (2012) uses the idea of affective encounters to approach her
study of the common cold virus. She writes about how humans and viruses learn

to be affected by one another through embodied communication, and how this

affect interacts with epidemiological research institutions and notions of the
dangerous epidemic versus the endemic, everyday disease.

    Many concurrent, affective processes are associated with helminthic therapy.

Some of these processes include: the altered microbial ecologies of the human gut


                                         18
in developed countries; the transportation of hookworms from one country to
another with contested degrees of legality; the disturbance of social taboos

against parasites; chemical interactions between host and parasite bodies; the

emergence of a symbiotic relationship between human and hookworm; the
emergence of new sources of medical information; and the commodification of

an organism. The human–hookworm assemblage, embedded in its intestinal

territory, exists amid this “turbulence of articulations” (Whatmore and Hinchliffe
2010, 447). Instead of treating a hookworm-infected gut or ova-laced patch of soil

like a passive backdrop, as is often the case in traditional cultural geography, or

like a decisive factor, as in environmental determinism, an assemblage -based
ontology will allow me to explore the multivalence of this human–hookworm

relationship—how it comes together in different ways to create new and

evolving meanings and material realities.
    These three principles politicize my project and provide ethical guidance.

Assemblage and affect are ways of understanding the world that, in their stark

notice of the many elements that exert force on our lives, give us the opportunity
to break from our engrained performativity. For Woodward and Lea, “the

perspective of affects rails against such tautological and exculpatory givenness”
(2010, 159), it rails against this hard-to-change performativity. They differentiate

between “the capacity to negatively affect,” which can “pre-empt and delimit

that group’s ability to affect the world” (159), and positive affects that can take
place in “sites” such as, in this case, the helminth-infected gut. Following

Woodward et al., the helminth-infected gut might be “where the unpredictable

eruption of minoritarian events and spaces can produce specific and potentially
transformative theoretical and political solutions that are anti-racist or anti-

capitalist or pro-autonomy and pro-questioning” (2010, 278).

    Note, however, that this radical openness is not inherently progressive. The
contingency wrought by affect only undermines the notion teleological,

predetermined futures. It still relies on human and more-than-human decision-

making in response to a given affective site, and could as easily lead to a cruel
decision as a mutualistic one. Rather, it is the understanding or perception of

affect that grants a progressive slant to this site-based affect. It is not knowledge




                                         19
that there are things tochange in the world that needs to be imparted; rather, it is

the knowledge that we couldmake those changes that is missing.

    The same is true in the context ofBennett’s political approach (2005; 2010).
For her, we have more possibility of impacting the world once we take a realistic

view of the forceswe face, rather than by pointing a finger at one guilty agent

whom we naïvely presume to be functioning independently (Bennett 2005).

Bennett gestures to this by rolling historical-materialism into her approach as
opposed to liberalism or humanism. However, she wishes to go a step further

than Marx by invoking more meaning and agency in objects and nonhumans

than the concept of reification isable to provide—she calls for a “dogged

resistance to anthropocentrism” (2010, xvi).  3

    Robbins and Marks (2010) also use assemblage to political ends. For them,
assemblage genealogies are not just for use in social movements, but can also

have a profound impact on policy decisions, as faulty assumptions based on an

ontology of human-only agency are toppled and more detailed descriptions

drawn up.
    In the human–hookworm assemblage, affect is the corporeal communication

that prompts new meanings and material differences to emerge. This emergence,

in turn, indicates just how contingent our futures are. It has implications not only

for how we view parasites and our bodies, but also for the politics of medicine.
All relations are historical without being predetermined, so helminthic therapy

can challenge how medicine has functioned in the past and how it might change

in the future.

    Research questions. The above directly informs my two research questions,
as I seek to understand the practical and political implications of the affective

lines running between a parasite and a host. Parasitism is a ubiquitous but oft -

disregarded form of interspecies interaction (Combes 2001). My first research

question asks how people learn to be affected by hookworm. The process begins


3
 This critique of Marx may be contested,however. Marx himself was cognizant of the way that
Hobsbawm 1965) that his division between humans and nature (and, perhaps, all nonhumanand
objects) is less essentialist than people commonly think. He places humans and nature so close
together that they may be seen as two sides of the same coin rather than a dialectically -related
dualism.


                                          20
when political economy, human illness, helminth reproduction, and medicine
come together in the material practice ofapplying hookworm eggs to skin,

initiating a new parasitic relationship, and fills out as people, culture, and

hookworms change together.
   My second question addresses the outcomes of this host-parasite affect. The

human–hookworm assemblage and the difference it produces create and change

medical knowledge and practice. Hookworms and their human hosts engage in
chemical interactions that barely pause from one generation of hookworms to the

next or from one human host to another (Despommier 2013). Informal cultures of

knowledge about how to use hookworms and judge their efficacy emerge from
this chemistry, and ultimately, it creates potential new niches for this animal in

today’s medical complex.

   Question 1: How do humans learn to be affected by hookworms? Braun
writes, “Too much research…sets out simply to demonstrate emergence…. Isn’t it

equally important to attend to how organization occurs?” (2008, 675). I aim to

show not just that affect (and thus emergence, contingency, instability, and
uncertainty) exists, but also how various elements in the human–helminth

assemblage learn to be affected. J. Lorimer (2007) lays out a version of these
processes explicitly. For him, animal affect can move into three types of

charisma: ecological, aesthetic, and corporeal. Hookworms can potentially also fit

into these categories. Ecological charisma has to do with the ways in which an
animal evolved in relation to humans. Hookworms’ position literally embedded

in humans in a physical manner throughout time played a huge role in their

detestability 100 years ago and plays one in their desirability today. Aesthetic
charisma (see figure 5) plays a role as well. Hookworms’ electron micrographs

lend them to monsterization, often resulting in a strong “yuck” response, as well

as anthropomorphization and an accompanying companion-animal status. The
heads of tapeworm, whipworm, and roundworm simply do not evoke the same

responses. Finally, corporeal charisma, or the impact of hookworms on the

human body during direct contact, playsout two-fold. First, it may be related to
initial contact between human and organism, as during an initial infection with

hookworms, which is said to produce a “high” feeling. Second, it may be related

to getting to know the animal over continued, everyday contact, as people with


                                        21
hookworms come to speak of them affectionately over time. Far from pointing to

environmental determinism, each of these affective performances could go in
very different directions—for example, consider how the hookworm may be

painted as monster or pet, or may produce sickness or health. The material

hookworm has something to do with these responses, and yet the multifarious
directions we, the affected, make of these responses allows for myriad possible

futures.













   Figure 5. The aesthetic charisma of hookworm. The left depicts a scary hookworm electron
   micrograph (Bourbontrails 2009); the right depicts a cute hookworm out of felt (Chalmers
   2012).


    The act of learningto be affected positions discourse and social construction as

outcomes rather than causes of material performances. The fact that we must
always learn to be affected points to flexibility and changeability within a

system, while socially determined construction remains static. If we let go of an

ontology of mind-oriented representation, we will be freed to look instead at
how interactions and perceptions themselves influence affect and, thus, bodies

(Braun 2008). Braun, in reflecting upon Hinchliffe et al. (2005), notes that to be

effective, a conservationist must “first learn to be open to different ways of
knowing and registering the presence of different animals” (Braun 2008, 672).

Similarly, to be effective in producing new medical knowledge, the Crohn’s

patient must first learn to be open to different ways of knowing and registering

the presence of hookworm.
    Learning doesn’t require either the cognitive registration of a practice or a

humanized will to perform. Theories of non-representation do not wish to

continue to define agencywith an anthropocentric circumscription of will,



                                          22
intentionality, and subjectivity. Braun, referencing ideas of Deleuze and Guattari,
speaks of


   the idea of a “layout” or a “coming together” of disparate elements, and the
   idea of “agency” or the capacity to produce an effect. The advantage of actant
   (and agencement[assemblage] even more so) is that it rejects notions of agency

   inherited from liberal humanism, regardless of whether one is speaking of
   nonhumans or humans (2008, 167).

Alongside the notion of n -1 introduced earlier, assemblages and their human

and nonhuman actants (not agents) see practice, rather than language and

cognition, as constitutive of sites of learning and knowledge (Braun 2008). A
wider definition of agency in the context of performativity includes ethology

(Hinchliffe 2008; Stallins and Kelley 2012), emotions and feelings (Pile 2010;

McCormack 2005), entangled identities (Davies 2012), vernacular ecologies
(Whatmore and Hinchliffe 2010), and the aforementioned charisma (Lorimer

2007). Again, performativity asa means of knowledge- and world-making isn’t

inherently progressive (Butler 2010), but understanding performativity, and
perhaps more importantly for this case, the permeability of the body, indicates a

possible point of reterritorialization.

   Learning to be affected is the performativity of the creation of difference. For
Whatmore and Hinchliffe, “The more you learn to be affected, the more

differences there exist” (2010, 446). Some of the differences created in this case
include how two hookworms will act differently within the same human body,

or how two humans would react differentlyto the same hookworm chemicals or

hookworm advertisement. In this way, two very different, contradictory, aspects
of the helminth infection, first as illness and then as cure, begin to emerge. Affect

and the creation of difference don’t end on the individual scale, however. They

also reach into the social level, where multiple politic al and medical futures are
waitng to emerge. This brings me to Question 2.

   Question 2: Which aspects of hookworm therapy aid incorporation into

institutional medicine, and which hinder incorporation? Uneven medical,
social, and economic practices emerge from the human–hookworm assemblage.

Medically, tensions build between simple germ theory and the hygiene




                                        23
hypothesis, and between anecdotal self-experimentation and clinical lab

experimentation. Socially, some people are validated by hookworm infection,

while others remain alienated. Economically, hookworms become valued
differently depending on the laws surrounding them. These contradictions

invoke what Bingham and Hinchliffe might call a multinaturalist take on the

geography of medicine: “what we are seeking here more broadly is not a way of

mediating different (cultural) takes on a single (natural) world, but in learning
how we might better articulate (and articulate together) manifold modes of

living” (2008, 84).

    I expect that affect’s creation of difference both aids and hinders the
incorporation of hookworm knowledge into formal medical treatments. From

that starting point, I seek to understand the incorporation of a living organism

into medical treatment affects the potential of that treatment and how this

treatment is being rejected, received and reconceived in established medicine.
Hookworms can both borrow from and push back against the stringent

ontologies of institutional medicine (Mol 2002). Animal charisma is useful for

biochemists and hookworm bootleggers alike. Pharmacogenomics practices

(Dove et al. 2012) may both steal from and provide for do-it-yourself helminthic
therapy communities.

    Whereas classic production-of-nature theses (Castree 2000; Bird et al. 1996;

Smith 2007, 2008) identify how organismal goods and services readily join
circuits of capitalization (Cooper 2012; Hayden 2003; Bakker 2010), there are

aspects of helminthic therapy that seem to work against a complete and final

incorporation into the formal medical establishment. For example, while

helminthic therapy has become a crowd-sourced citizen science (Dove et al. 2012;
Cooper 2012), with large portions of information generated in online forums and

groups, this citizen science both individualizes medicine in a neoliberal manner

and communalizes experimentation by and for patients. This research question

will inform us about the crisis in health care, the shifting role of social media,



4
 The germ theory of medicine states that germs, rather than bad air or divine ag ency, can cause
some of the false assumptions that arise out of it, like that all germs are bad and cause disease.



                                          24
individual medical experimentation, and citizen science in the construction of
health knowledge and practice.

    The power of helminthic therapy is built upon recognition of difference—in

human bodies and in hookworm bodies. These differences—this individuation—
should not be used to reduce humans and hookworms simply to diverse subjects

at the expense of social justice (Roberts 2010). Instead, these organisms form a

multitude that, together, experimental science must contend with, and that,
together, present the possibility of new affective relationships and new futures

(Davies 2012; Saldanha 2006). Further, being able to show that helminths are

affecting humans not just differently between humans, but differently depending
on social setting, points to areas in which work must be done to rectify economic

inequality. My questions tease apart these contradictions and differences in

bodies and health in order to show contingency and hence engagesocio-political
possibility.

    Rather than attempting to formulate hypotheses from my research questions,

the questions evoke stories, which in turn evoke theories. The process in which
theory is formed from the data collected, rather than collected data provingor

disproving hypotheses, is called grounded theory (Corbin and Strauss 2007). It is
especially useful in cases such as this one, where the subject matter is complex,

actions and relationships are at the heart of the study, and social constructions

and material phenomena influence each other continually. Not posing a
preconceived hypothesis avoids inadvertently skewing results with biases and

misrepresenting the information I gather. Ultimately, neither of these questions

will tell me if, indeed, helminthic therapy works, or what percentage of Crohn’s
patients want to try it. However, they do provide a complex analysis of social,

political, medical, and economic forces, and thus enable me to make certain

recommendations regarding this new therapy and medical practice in general
going forward.

    Epistemology. Assemblage geography focuses on a set of entangled

relationships and the affect that flows along them. In framing what a researcher
is studying, assemblage is also a method of study (Robbins and Marks 2010).

Further, like in quantum physics’ double -slit experiment, as soon as you observe

a given assemblage, you become a part of its affectivity (Barad 2003). Thus, my


                                         25
method had lead me to carefully choose who I study, who I wish to write for,
what I wish to affect, and how I go about intervening. While I tried to minimize

my interference in any ways that would bias the answers I received from

participants, I hope that my research practice, including announcements seeking
volunteers, conversations with peopleI encountered at the research sites, and the

interviews themselves, provoked thought on this topic (Woodward et al. 2010).

   Assemblage calls for a methodology that can account for its complexity and
lack of final causative correlations. Deleuze and Guattari (1986) write that

assemblages allow for their own reterritorialization—in other words, there may

always be a piece of an assemblage that may escaping and then reworking the
larger unit. As a method, acknowledging that I am writing an assemblage

description allows my performance of critique to escape the confines of the

system of which I am a part, and grow into something that can more deeply
transform the field of critical health geography.

   Further, I use an assemblage method because it allows us to go beyond the

subjective actant and cause-and-effect. Robbins and Marks (2010) note that
assemblage perspectives make it difficult to determine cause and effect or

explain definitive undebatable “whys.” By looking at human, hookworm, and
associated elements as part of an assemblage, and constructing a complex

narrative about them, we can come to see how each part touches others through

affect, not human-like agency, leading to a deeper understanding of the oft -
neglected nonhuman side of the story, and of how these vernacular ecologies

come to be formed.

   To gather information for this descriptive narrative, I engaged mixed
qualitative methods: descriptive narrative, semi- structured interviews, online

ethnography, and analysis of message boards. My target human subjects were

patients with Crohn’s disease using hookworms, though I ended up
incorporating some stories from subjects with other immune disorders or who

are using pig or human whipworm rather than hookworm. Besides conducting

semi-structured interviews with these subjects, I also spoke to two doctors, one
helminth provider, one website entrepreneur, and two journalists. Most of my

interviewees lived in New York City and the San Francisco Bay area, but two

lived in New England, and three lived outside the US . Most of the interviews


                                        26
were in person, but some were via email and telephone. The online ethnography
and analysis of message boards took place onpopular social media websites .

    Online ethnographies. It is on popular social media websites that, for years,

patients have formed unofficial networks of knowledge with one another,
lending information and advice that persuades or dissuades inquirers from

trying hookworm. I follow various internet groups and message boards on

supporting helminthic therapy users, discussing how to use and cultivate
helminthes, biome reconstruction, and human bacteriology. Discussions and

posts I follow range from simple inquiries about whether helminthic therapy will

work for a specific ailment, to detailed stories of self-experimentation. I will not
state the names of these groups or the websites that host them to prevent any

possible repercussions on patients and providers.

    I took a minimal role in these groups, and gathered data mainly as an
observer. Using methods from Robert Kozinets’s 2010 Netnography: Doing

Ethnographic Research Online, I used these internet groups to observe how users

interact, form connections, and exchange and shape knowledge. For Kozinet, we
need to be extra careful not to violate online users’ privacy dueto the uncertain

public/private definition of online spaces. Using care, I found that online
ethnography gave me a window into one of the main means of communication

around helminthic therapy, and placed me in the same position as many of my

subjects for whom internet observation is their main form of participation.
    Interviews with helminthic therapy patients. I conducted semi-structured

interviews with Crohn’s disease and other immune system disorder patients (see

figure 6). These disorders can affect allaspects of a person’s life, it’s important to
maintain confidentiality for all patient -subjects. The patient may need access to a

bathroom very frequently, may experience severe pain, may require heavy

pharmaceutical drugs, and may even need to get sections of the digestive tract
removed. Crohn’s patients usually experience flair -ups interspersed with periods

closer to normal function, meaning that symptoms can range from mild to severe

in a single case. Because of the tenuous legal nature of helminths therapy today,
and because of the sensitive medical information being described and its

possibility of social and professional stigma, I will protect the identity of my

participants in all my published work by using pseudonyms.


                                         27
                                                                 Interview
                                                              method (semi-
                    On                                        structured and
                helminthic                       Medical      audio recorded    Age / Gender /
   Pseudonym     therapy?       Location        condition      unless email)      Occupation

 1     Ann          Yes      Northeastern US Crohn's disease     in-person    20s, female, student
                                              Crohn's disease
                                               and multiple                     20s, male, world
 2    David         Yes         Australia          other        video chat          traveler
                                                                                  40s, female,

 3    Dixie         Yes      Northeastern US  Multiple other      phone         medical worker
                                              Severe allergies                     40s, male,
 4    Greg          Yes        SF Bay area       / asthma        in-person        programmer
 5    Hugh          Yes      New York City    Crohn's disease    in-person     30s, male, finance

 6     Jill         Yes      United Kingdom      Eczema            email        20s/30s female
 7     Karl         Yes      New York City    Crohn's disease    in-person         30s, male
                                                                                   20s, male,
                                                                                   computer

 8     Ken          Yes      New York City       Allergies       in-person        programmer
                                                                               late teens, female,
 9    Molly         No       New York City    Crohn's disease    in-person          student
                                                                               late teens, female,
10    Reina         No       New York City    Crohn's disease    in-person          student
                                                                                   20s, male,
11   Ronald         No         Southern US    Crohn's disease      email       computer engineer

                                                                                30s/40s, female,
12    Shelly        Yes        SF Bay area    Severe asthma      in-person         designer
13    Sonia         Yes        SF Bay area    Multiple other     in-person        40s, female

14     Tori         Yes          Canada       Crohn's disease   video chat     30s, white, female
                 Yes = 11      NY City = 5      Crohn’s = 8    in-person = 9       female = 8
                  No = 3     SF Bay area = 3   all other = 6    all other = 5      male = 6


   Figure 6. List of all patient interviewees (excludes professional interviewees, even those on
   helminthic therapy).



    Patients were given the opportunity to describe the process of learning to be

affected, whether through acute pain that may have motivated starting

helminthic therapy, the emotional responses and intimacy of living with the

                                                                                         5
hookworm, or any of the everyday, “vernacular” practices that arise. Some of

these patients were affiliated with helminthic therapy clinics. Others were


patients who reproduce and reinfect with hookworm at home. These at-home

practitioners provided valuable information about do -it-yourself processes,

concepts of medical expertise, and legal concerns. The group is diverse in other


ways, too. Their politics varies, as does their level of involvement with deciding

about their medical treatments. What they do have in common is that they all

have difficult, chronic diseases, and they are all seeking treatment for them.





5
 Please refer to Appendix for a list of in terview questions.



                                                   28
   By talking to Crohn’s and other patients who are on the hookworms, and
asking them about the role these worms played in their personal stories, I gained

assurance that that I obtained information from people who feel not just the

discursive but also the direct material results of both illness and hosting. Crohn’s
patients were be able to provide insight the way their bodies interact with the

parasites, as well as the journey each side (human and hookworm) took to reach

the other. Their answers are not likely to be replicated by another subject. Each
person’s story is bound to be different. Thus, rather than attempting to draw out

a statistical analysis of the resulting data, I use individual life stories as access

points to case studies of particular human–hookworm assemblages.
   Interviews with both informal and institutional medical researchers,

providers, and journalists. Following is a list of the public professionals I

interviewed for this project. These professionals had sometimes conflicting
viewpoints, but revealed some of the tension behind expert knowledge. They

also gave some context to the socioeconomic processes behind hookworm

therapy. See Appendix for an list of example questions.
       •  Dr. Joel Weinstock, Tufts University, clinician and researcher in

          Crohn’s disease and whipworm, involved with tests on pig whipworm
          for Coronado Biosciences (interviewed in person)

       •  Dr. P’ng Loke, New York University, parasitology lab researcher

          currently working with immunology and whipworm in lab mice
          (interviewed in person)

       •  Jasper Lawrence, AutoimmuneTherapies.com, a helminthic therapy

          provider and commonly known as the first person to self-infect outside
          of a medical setting (interviewed on Skype)

       •  Sean Ahrens, Crohnology.com, uses helminthic therapy for his own

          Crohn’s disease (interviewed by email)
       •  Moises Velasquez-Manoff, journalist and author of An Epidemic of

          Absence (2013), self infected as part of his research (interviewed in

          person)
       •  Sharon Shattuck, documentarian and ecologist, made the short film

          Parasites: A User’s Guide (2010) (interviewed in person)




                                        29
   The first two individuals above, Weinstock and Loke, are medical
researchers. By studying not just the doctors’ words, but also their reactions to

my questions, I can gain deeper insight into their affective involvement with the

human–helminth assemblage. Their perspectives also informed me as to how
helminthic therapies and the knowledge they produce inform institutional

medicine.

   The third individual, Lawrence, is a private helminthic therapy provider.
Clinicians, even those who focus on helminthic therapy, cannot recommend or

prescribe the therapy to their patients until approved by the FDA. Although

some researchers are using live helminths in clinical trials, helminthic therapy
does not have FDA approval for non-trial distribution and sales. Thus, all

companies producing and distributing helminthic therapy to the general public

are located outside of the US. Thus, both clinicians and researchers in the US
don’t come into contact with helminthic therapy users unless they are

conducting a clinical trial or their patientsdecide on their own to seek out the

worms. Thus, overseas providers are the only ones who come in contact with
patients regularly. They possess a vernacular knowledge (Whatmore and

Hinchliffe 2010) of the ecology and political economy of helminthic therapy.
They are in touch with the same patients over long periods of time. Some

patients require more worms every year. Other patients may need to send fecal

samples to the provider for testing to make sure eggs—and therefore, the
parasites themselves—haven’t been lost. Providers may therefore have more raw

data than anyone else about helminth users as a group—indeed, what patients

tell their online groups and what they tell their medical providers is likely to
vary greatly. Lawrence heads helminth provider Autoimmune Therapies in the

United Kingdom. Another helminth provider, Worm Therapy/Instituto De

Terapias Alternativas Autoinmunes, is run by Dr. Jorge A. Llamas and
Lawrence’s former business partner, Garin Aglietti in Tijuana, Mexico, and is

frequented by US worm users. Ovamed, once affiliated with Weinstock’s

whipworm trials, is located in Germany. I was able to gain an interview only
with Lawrence.

   The fourth individual, Ahrens, started Crohnology.com, a website dedicated

to building a community of Crohn’spatients and allowing researchers to gather


                                        30
statistics on how well different treatments work. It falls somewhere between
message board anecdotes and double-blind, placebo-based studies. It includes

tabs for tracking mental and physical health, and treatments, as well as forums

and ways to connect with other Crohn’s patients. Helminthic therapy is a
recognized treatment on the site, and Ahrens, uses helminthic therapy for his

own Crohn’s.

   Velasquez-Manoff and Shattuck provided me information about some of the
struggles they came across while trying to formulate an unbiased report for the

public on the subject of helminthic therapy. Both place an emphasis on scientific

accuracy and unbiased research, so they provided me with a sense of balance
and place a check on biases that may have crept into my research.

   Data collection and analysis. I used an audio recorder for all interviews

when permitted, whether conducted live or over the phone or computer. Only
one interviewee declined an audio recording. Having an audio recording

prevented me from having to write notes the entire time of the interview for

better interpersonal engagement. I also took notes of important points spoken by
the respondents in a paper notebook. While handwriting is slower than I typing,

I believe that a notebook will prove less distracting than taking notes on a
computer, again allowing unfettered engagement with the respondents.

   Once all interviews were collected, I transcribed them. This functioned to

immerse me in the information a second time, and to reminded me of pieces I
may not have noticed at first. I did not formally code the interviews, but instead

created a document with categorical headings and pulled excerpts from the

transcripts into relevant categories. In the future, I believe a stricter coding
procedure would be helpful.

   Rigor and reliability. Using Baxter and Eyels’ (1997) report on evaluating

qualitative research, I attempted to sample interviewees and conduct interviews
to best enhance credibility, dependability, and con firmability, and transferability.

   Attaining enough interviews so that a range of opinions emerged enhanced

credibility. A semi-structured interview style and vigilance as to which prompts
worked and which did not allowed me to pursue new questions as theycame up.

I used a combination of sampling styles. First, with targeted sampling I contacted

key individuals outspoken on the Internet, producing respondents who were


                                        31
well-versed in the issues and who were willing to “tell all.” Second, snowball
sampling allowed me to speak with people I might not otherwise have

encountered, or who are not part of online communities. Third, I reached out to

individuals across the US and in other countries to ensure that I am got
perspectives from people in both urban and rural social groups. One problem I

faced is that internet users possibly skewed my sample toward particular social-

and age-groups. On the other hand, information about helminthic therapy is
largely available only online and not in doctor’s offices or on television, so it is

likely that internet users are the primary population to hear about and use

helminthic therapy. Gathering the responses of not just patients, but also a range
of professionals, provided some balances. Also, the online ethnography

component of the project also allowed me to double-check my findings.

    Dependability relies on my use of audio recordings, which I transcribed in
order to draw out quotes and to compare between interviews. Conversations

with my advisor, committee members, and peers about how my research went

and my methods for analysis helped ensure that I don’t overlook any important
pieces on information. My own field notes provided a level of confirmability , since

I was be able to compare my emotional and intellectual responses from the time
of the interview with my thoughts during the drawn-out process of analyzing

and writing up my results. I am also in the process of running some of my results

by at least one helminth user who I interviewed to ensure I maintained both
confidentiality and accuracy.

   The fourth characteristic, transferability, presents a challenge to qualitative

researchers, but an assemblage-based study is uniquely primed to cope with this
challenge. One of the foundations of assemblage theory is that no two situations

are alike—each is a singularity. But instead of taking this to mean that each study

will be only of use in the particular case studied, assemblage, with its detailed
descriptions of networks and interactions, can provide important information for

other cases about human–animal interactions and its impact on medicine.

Although my study does branch out from my original plan to study Crohn’s
patients and hookworm only, I am careful to be specific in my descriptions so

that receiving researchers will be able to clearly discern what will and won’t be




                                         32
useful for them to take from this study. Specificity allows others to know what
isn’t—and what is—transferable from my project.

    Representation can become a problem, especially in research on affect.

Almost all research involves some form of linguistic representation, whether
between subjects of study and researcher, or between researcher and readership.

It is impossible to get an untarnished picture of the affective qualities of

performative material subjects of study. Researchers studying representation and
construction must be careful to critique their own constructions of the project.

However, researchers taking a critical materialist perspective must be aware of

the fact that representation, while not the sole object of study, still exists, and will
impact the results of a project. Further, my representations of the project, my

affective impacts on it, and the ways in which I learn to be affected by it will

automatically reference my own position in the story. My tangential and direct
relationships to autoimmune disease and the medical industry have

undoubtedly impacted my thesis, so I have been careful to use dependability

checks during data collection and analysis.






























                                          33
CHAPTER FOUR: HOW HUMANS LEARN TO BE AFFECTED BY
HOOKWORMS



   The physical and mental changes that humans experience when exposed to
hookworms are not imaginary. These changes are part of how humans learn to

be affected by hookworms. Descriptions have the power to elucidate this process.

My descriptions below are based on interviews and online content about
helminthic therapy. How humans learn to be affected by hookworms may be

articulated as a number of steps. The steps I have defined as learning to be

affected are (0) separation from hookworm, (1) t urning toward the helminth, (2)
overcoming the “yuck” factor, (3) acquiring hookworms, and (4) contact and the

production of difference. These steps are the multiple lines of affect that tie

together the various parts of the human–helminth assemblage. While these steps
are often happening concurrently, they are also sometimes being skipped over,

pieced together, and completely destroyed. These steps are, in reality, messy and

overlapping, but I pull them apart below in order to make the process more
intelligible. As Marks and Robbins (2010) mention, we are tied to language in

order to render our understandings of assemblage. Do note that the words we do
not use may have just as much to say as the ones we do use: any steps I leave out

should also draw the reader’s attention.In the end, they must be seen in relation

to one another, not as individual steps along a path toward effect.


   0. The phase between the hookworms: separation.

   The “phase between the hookworms,” implies a time period when humans
were not infected with hookworms. This occurs when hookworms have been

eradicated from a given human population, and have not yet been introduced as

medicine. It is not pre-contact, but between contact. Although it is tempting to
say that this is a stage during which we are not in relationship with hookworms,

the absence of the hookworm only brings us closer to deconstructing our real

relationship with them. Rather than explaining a pre-affective stage, I would like
to present a stage in which our affective relationship to particular parasites—

namely, human hookworm and human whipworm—is that the two are notin

physical contact with one another, and that the parasites are treated with


                                       34
discursive disgust by humans. This “phase zero,” in which humans and
helminths do not touch, is associated with various autoimmune diseases,

allergies, asthma, and possibly a whole slew of other ailments, including

depression.
   Humans have coexisted with hookworms and other parasites since before we

could be considered human, and many of these parasitic species must live in

humans exclusively. Humans have always been habitats and must remain so.
Bacteria, for example, we already know to be essential to human digestion, and

this is just the start for known commensal organisms. This kind ofequilibrium is

no utopia, and we can see this in the negative consequences of parasitic
infections. However, it wasn’t until the last couple of hundred years that socio-

economic conditions, the culture of late capitalism, and medical technology came

together to make eliminating parasites a desirable and realizable goal.
   Hookworm eradication started in the US South 100 years ago, where

hookworm was endemic in many states until a public-private partnership, the

Rockefeller Sanitary Commission for the Eradication of Hookworm Disease, was
funded with a $1 million grant by John D. Rockefeller in 1909. The campaign,

noted as the first modern public health effort, was sparked after an investigation
pointed to hookworm as the cause for the supposed “laziness” of Southerners

who hadn’t picked up factory work as quickly as hoped during the

Reconstruction period (Ettling 1981; Brown 1979).The Commission on Country
Life reported that “quite aside from the humanitarian point of view, the

aggregate annual loss to the nation from insanitary conditions on the farms must,

when expressed in money values, reach an enormous sum” (United States
Country Life Commission and Bailey 1909, 46). Within a few years, the mission

of hookworm eradication was spreading to Mexico, China, the Philippines, and

elsewhere around the world (Birn and Solórzano 1999; Brown 1976).
   Today, a battle against many intestinal parasites (helminths) continues, fueled

by a dual mandate of global health and economic success. In stating this second

point, USAID’s website echoes the commission’s statement above:
       In children, chronic hookworm infection has been shown to impair
       physical and intellectual development, reduce school performance and

       attendance, and adversely affect future productivity and wage-earning potential
       (USAID 2012; italics added).


                                        35
Further, anti-parasite (anthelmintic) drugs present a huge market opportunity
for pharmaceutical companies. Although other methods, such as latrine-

building, exist, according to a study by the Disease Control Priorities Project,

       Until new technologies become available, anthelmintic chemotherapy for
       school-age children remains the most practical and substantive means to
       control STH [soil-transmitted helminths] and schistosome infections in the
       developing world (Hotez et al. 2006).

   Humans in the US and many other parts of the Global North are now rid of

their intimate, but often pesky, companions. According to the biome depletion

theory, however, this raises a new series of problems for human health. While
epidemiology has for years considered human bodily equilibrium to be a human

body without infections, this definition is changing. Sometimes infections may be
necessary for equilibrium. Many interviewees had also reached this conclusion,

and were adamant about theimportance of balance and extra-human

relationships. For example, Tori told me,
       We’ve evolved with helminths in our guts, and it’s become a symbiotic

       relationship, and if we don’t have them, to help train and modulate and
       moderate our immune system during your developmental years, which is
       the concept, then we throw the immune system off, so that it becomes this
       thing that does harm and attacks our body as opposed to help our body.


Sonia, who found that parasites didn’t work for her disease, yet kept them
anyway because

       our body expects to have some kind of parasites to be able to, for the
       immune system to be balanced, so I think they are a natural part of me, so
       that’s why I kept them.


   Likewise, filmmaker and ecologist Sharon Shattuck begins her film, P arasites:
A User’s Guide (2013), with a quote from John Muir: “When we try to pick out

anything by itself, we find it hitched to everything else in the universe.” The

premise of her short film about helminthic therapy was this long evolved
interconnectionbetween humans and parasites, and the damage separation can

do.

   One of the major helminth providers, AutoimmuneTherapies.com, writes
about this stage of separation on the front page of their website:





                                        36
       Probiotic Immunotherapy safely and naturally restores nature’s balance to
       your immune system, quells inflammation, and stops tissue damage.
       Helminthic therapy, nature’s most powerful probiotic, harnesses nature to
       heal, restoring the helper organisms we co-evolved with and that our
       immune systems depend on to function correctly, and is based on
       sound science.


Compare this to the official website for Janssen Biotech’s drug Remicade, which

casts autoimmune as the defective presence of an immune system molecule
rather than the absence of a relationship:

       People with certain diseases have too much TNF-alpha that can cause the
       immune system to attack normal healthy parts of the body. REMICADE
       can block the damage caused by too much TNF-alpha.


   For Moises Velasquez-Manoff, one of the major differences in this new

perspective is the way that people are given areason for their illness—this
absence of helminthes—rather than having to blame their own faulty bodies for a

presence:


       how alleviating to know that there’s a reason for your malady—that it’s
       not your fault, and that it’s not random. How terrific that the scientists
       exploring this treatment can explain these diseases in a way that the
       creators of immune suppressants and asthma inhalers can’t (2012, 276).

   In terms of evolutionary medicine, assuming a possible state of utopic

equilibrium is impossible. Our health isn’t perfect whether or not we are infected
with hookworm. Still, striving for balance tends to place hookworm in the realm

of “good” instead of “bad,” which complicates a definition of health as

infectionless. However, that is just where many people in the US are today:
relatively infectionless.



   1. Turning toward the helminth
   People hear about helminths in all sorts of ways, but not through the

mainstream medicine. Because the treatment is not FDA approved, a doctor

could be sued for recommending it, even if they have read research about
helminths and believe it could help their patient. Instead, patients often learn

about helminths through home online research, the media, or even through jobs




                                        37
in the medical field. Turning toward healing parasites is an active process, and

one strong motivation is how they work in comparison to pharmaceuticals.
    Part of the reason autoimmune patients do extra research on alternatives is

because often conventional drugs have serious or scary side effects and are only

somewhat effective. People generally move up a chain of drugs as the effects of

the previous drug wears off. These medications work better for some than others
and tend to lose their effectiveness over time. Sometime, the drugs do not work

well enough to prevent the need for surgical removal of sections of intestine, or

colectomies. Biologic drugs are a final line of treatment for many patients.
Biologics are highly complex, large -molecule drugs that are created with

recombinant DNA technology and manufactured within living organisms or

biological tissues. Throughout the course of this project, I heard two people talk
about friends who got a rare soft-tissue cancer while on a biologic, at least one of

them fatal. Others said that they, themselves, were on biologics, but felt it was

risky. The websites for the biologics feature a prominent warning on their front

page. Remicade’s reads:
       REMICADE can lower your ability to fight infections. Serious and
       sometimes fatal events can occur. There have been reports of serious
       infections including tuberculosis (TB) and infections caused by bacteria,

       fungi, or viruses that have spread throughout the body. Lymphoma,
       including a fatal kind called hepatosplenic T -cell lymphoma, and other ®
       cancers have been reported in children and adults taking REMICADE .
       Some people with heart failure should not take REMICADE       ®. Other
       serious side effects reported include skin cancer, hepatitis B, liver injury,
       blood problems, allergic reactions, ne rvous system problems, or lupus-like
       syndrome.


    One doctor I interviewed told me that these fears are exaggerated, because

according to trial follow-ups, cancer rates were still negligible compared with

how many people used the drug overall. Peer-reviewed medical journals
reported ambivalent results(Lichtenstein et al. 2006; D’Haens 2007). Further,

sometimes pharmaceutical companies start their own journals, complete with

peer-reviewed articles, in order to propagate positive reviews of their drugs
(Moffatt and Elliott 2007). The uncertainty of patients is, in part, what leads

toward this turn.





                                         38
   Hookworms, however, are somewhat specialized (though increasingly
indicated for more medical issues than before). They are not pre-assumed to be

helpful, like diet restrictions or de-stressing, but rather must make themselves

known. Something between shock value and charisma has allowed them into the
popular media, and their relative effectiveness has helped them to spread by

word of mouth and also in the medical community. Turning toward the

helminth sometimes involved science media discourse. Dixie, who worked in a
medical setting, told me:

       We heard a little about that as early as 1998 in the popular press. That’s
       when I got wind of all this, through the news feed for the hospital I
       worked for.


   Two interviewees weren’t getting better with pharmaceuticals and were

facing more rounds of surgical removal of intestines. They both stumbled across
Joel Weinstock’s research. Tori said:

       I was just literally looking at resear ch, seeing what was coming out, and I
       ran into Dr. Weinstock and Summers’s article. They did a small study in
       Ohio, I think it was, and I just kept finding more material about helminth
       therapy to the point where it was just, I needed to try something else,I
       knew that my medication wasn’t working, I knew that they wanted to do
       more surgery, and I didn’t want to go that route.


Hugh was pouring over research after yet another intestine-removal surgery:

       I read Joel Weinstock’s research. He was doing it beforeit had become
       popular in the media. He was doing it in the ’90s…

   A number of interviewees heard about helminthic therapy through WNYC’s

public radio program Radiolab (Smullyan 2009). The show juxtaposed the
harmful and helpful hookworm, and interviewed he lminthic therapy pioneer

Jasper Lawrence. Radiolab was also my own first introduction to the therapy.

However, for Ann, listening to Radiolab with her boyfriend had to be followed
up with extensive, self-motivated research:

       So, I remember we were both listening to this [Radiolab], and were like,
       that’s really cool, you know? But we didn’t really know how feasible it
       would actually be, like it’s not legal in the United States, how am I gonna
       get this? … So I started doing a lot of research, and realized that it is
       feasible. And with a little persistence and looking into things, and a lot of

       contacting and reaching out to the Facebook group and the Yahoo! group,
       I got some feedback from people and wanted to do it.


                                        39
For Shelly, too, it took more than a listen:

       So, I had heard about it, the Radiolab show, with Jasper Lawrence, and I
       had heard that incredibly compelling story, I can still remember where I
       was when I heard it, I was just like wow, wow, really!?
       …

       Well, that was years ago, but it stayed with me all that time. So, I think, at
       a certain point when I was thinking, [the current drug treatment’s] not a
       permanent fix, I don't wanna be on that forever, that I started turning to
       that.


   Still others, like two young women in their late teens being treating with
biologics for Crohn’s disease, told me that they had not heard of helminthic

therapy before I brought it to their attention. They sounded uncertain about

trying it, and the yuck factor was big, but though it would be a last resort for
them, like many other patients they felt that if the potential benefits outweighed

potential risks, it was worth a try.
   Why did hookworms really catch these patients’ attention? Tori said:

       Many times a pill they say is not going to do harm, does harm, after
       several years of observation of people taking certain medications. So, I
       actually would stick to the worm. They’ve been around longer and we’ve
       been working together longer than some manufactured medication.


She added that personality may also play a role in turning towar d helminths:

       But many people, I think, I are conformists. And they want to go the
       medical route because that’s what is accepted, and that’s all they are open
       to. And there’s a few of us that are maybe rebels for whatever reason and
       we … I think it’s a certain character personality character trait that keeps
       people like myself searching and looking for other alternatives and
       learning about things. Because if it wasn’t from my research skills and
       learning, I probably wouldn’t be taking helminths. But there’s that

       element of my personality that keeps me open to new ideas.

Greg spoke about how new generations are less likely to trust doctors:

       There’s generational differences with how people trust doctors, too. Like
       the older generation, they’ll just do whateverthe doctor tells them to. Like
       my mom, she just, she won’t ask any questions, she won’t bring up
       anything, she won’t do, cause they act like the doctor’s god.


   Patients often felt like they were on their own in discovering helminths. Hugh

told me:


                                        40
       I had to go through six GI [gastro-intestinal] doctors before I found
       somebody who would accept. Just, a lot of them don’t keep up with

       current research. They only believe what they learned in med school 20
       years ago. A lot of them are closed-minded, they’re arrogant, they think
       they know best, and they refuse to listen to the patient. So, really good
       doctors are rare.


Tori recalled feelings of frustration when dealing with one doctor who was not

supportive of her seeking alternatives:
       I had a doctor, when I was18, when I was sick, really quite sick for the

       second time, tell me that diet had nothing to do with it, and that I could be
       on a jelly bean diet and have a 30 percent chance of going into remission—
       that diet had nothing to do with it. I don’t know how any doctor could say
       that diet has nothing to do with your health.


Only one person I talked to heard of it through a friend, and none heard of it

through a doctor. How people heard about the worms, in other words, was not

through in-person networks, but through publicly available media and internet
articles. People are hooked in to a network of information that mediates our

relationships to other parts of the world, to knowledge, and to our own bodies.

This information network will have an impact on how we react to worms. But it

also means that somepeople are out there seeking out information on their
health, taking an active role in medical research, and looking to the actions of the

worms, scientists, and anecdotes, and studies rather than just passively receiving

information from friends, doctors, or television.The role of internet, and its

flattening of expertise, features prominently.


    2: Overcoming the “yuck” factor.

    Self-infecting with hookworm can be a moment of revulsion or optimism. It
                                                                         6
goes against accepted notions of health. As an object of social taboo,    hookworm
infections became disgusting and outside of the human realm: an other to be

expelled or killed, not necessary to life on earth. The social taboo that is

commonly associated with hookworm is “the yuck factor.” This term is often

6Social taboos may be viewed from a number of different angles. Freud (1913) discusses them in
Totem and Tabooas a social creation. A Foucauldian (1990 [1978]) view might be that social taboos
and repression are another way for us to reinforce the prominence of the matter at stake.
Agamben might say that bare life is an expression of taboo, and that the object of taboo becomes
expendable. All of these makes sense in terms of coming into contact with the hookworm.


                                           41
used loosely by hookworm users, but scholars have been debating its meaning
specifically in the context of biotechnological innovations since 1997, when

bioethicist Kass published an article called “The Wisdom of Rep ugnance.”

Niemelä (2011) asserts that Kass’s theory—that the yuck factor is based on a
“deep wisdom” of moral disgust —is damaging because it justifies a moralist

approach to biotechnological decisions such as stem-cell research. Instead, they

propose a yuck factor based in folk biology. Folk biology is how people use
everyday perception and cognition to sort out their material observations. For

example, since we need sex to reproduce, and cloning doesn’t include sex, it is a

disgusting way to create new life.
    The yuck factor is an ideal example of affect building relationships between

human and hookworm are built. The yuck factor is not an essential characteristic

of parasites, but rather a hegemonic,material-semiotic construct, capable of
being changed. Hookworm became disgusting probably through a combination

of new research on the germ theory of medicine and the hygiene movement that

followed it; racism and the discursive association of worms with poverty and the
diseased other; the negative effects of hookworm that people experienced, such

as anemia, itchy rashes, and stomach pain; and the association of snakes with the
fall from the Garden of Eden. For Dixie,

       You know, I’ve been looking at this for a very long time, and I am a
       religious person, and you can find references to nasty parasites in the
       bible, and that’s how far back our history goes. Like snakes, people are
       just averse to worms…. We have aversions to things, and probably there’s

       some basis for that in evolutionary biology.

    The yuck factor identified as a reason helminthic therapy is rejected by some

individual patients, according to some articles (Kaplan 2009) and to internet

social media sources. It’s also the reason that all of my interviewees must remain
unnamed—even a wholly legal hookworm infection could get someone in

trouble with friends, family, or workplace. Jill wrote,

       I’ve only told a couple of very close family about it. Having read tales of
       woe on forums about people getting horrified reactions I thought I’d leave
       it until I (hopefully) see results so that it becomes easier to explain. I went
       to my GP [general practitioner] to talk about it and get blood tests before
       inoculating and the locum I saw (who I’d never seen before) said, “I don’t
       know why anyone would want to put that intheir body,” and made me



                                         42
       make another appointment with the practice nurse rather than taking
       blood herself.


When I began my research, I thought that my patients would tell me that the
yuck factor very difficult to overcome. However, it turns out that theaffect of the

hookworm cuts both ways. As it heals people, their disgust falls away. Jill said

that she “got over that within minutes of reading about the potential benefits.”
Ann told me,

       Changes with taking one of the biologics could be permanent. So I kind of
       weighed the pros and cons of each. I wasn’t really grossed out about that,
       I was more like, cause I knew it’s not like you eat worms or anything gross
       like that, but I had reservations still. But I felt like it was the better option
       for sure.


Molly, a Crohn’s patient who was not using helminths and had heard about

them only from me, indicated that the yuck factor was certainly present, but
could be overcome. She used naturalness as rationale:

       I was talking to my parents and my boyfriend about it, and their first
       reaction was like, oh my god, that is disgusting. And that was my first
       reaction, too, like I would never do that, and then I thought about it more,
       cause I guess in like an illness you can kind of dismiss something for no
       valid reason, so Ilooked a little more in depth and made my decision on

       this. … Yeah, it kind of freaked me out, because I guess my thoughts were
       at first, letting that into your body... it’s natural, but it doesn’t seem
       natural, cause you’re not like born with that naturally, but it’s natural
       compared to the medication you’re putting in.


    Overcoming the yuck factor sometimes takes place within a generational
divide. Greg, for example, grew up the Southern US. His grandmother was

adamant about good hygiene and avoiding parasitic worm infections. Her
generation, after all, was the one born just after hookworms had become a public

enemy and widespread eradication efforts accompanied a new conviction that

hygiene was highest good (Rockefeller Sanitary Commission of Hookworm
Disease 1911). However, today Greg reinfects with worms at least once a year in

order to keep his extreme allergies at bay.

    Negative reactions can be frustrating. Tori said,
       I don’t find it yucky. If anything, I find it, um, natural, to a certain degree.

       Like we’re a part of nature, and we coexist with other beings. … But it is
       disappointing when you speak with someone who you think you could


                                         43
       help them, and the idea with parasites, they turn up their nose. And you
       think, well, this could help them, but they’re not even open to that. And
       you think, it’s sad.


   Even in conversation with individuals without a diagnosed immune system
disorder, people’s disgust would transform into curiosity and acceptance

quickly. Our conversations often ended with questions about the cost and

availability of helminths. I expected that the stigma around hookworms would
be much more powerful than it turned out to be. Hookworms’ acceptance by so

many others, the intrigue of the largely forgotten human microbiome, and even

the bathroom humor surrounding hookworms may all have contributed to this
quick turnaround, but most of all it’s hookworms’ effectiveness that changed the

conversation from “yuck” to, as Ann put it, “it’s cool!”

   Its less a matter of people overcoming the yuck affect—which implies that the
yuck continues to exist—than it is of them rewriting, or, as Deleuze and Guattari

(1987) might put it, reterritorializing, the folk biology of the human gut. One

woman I interviewed got a tattoo of her parasite. Greg is proud when heshows
off his hookworm rashes (see figure 7). Hookworms, which are presented in

textbooks as being scary and disgusting, Tori now refers to as her “pets,” and the
term parasite is discarded in favor of helminths or symbionts by many of my

interviewees.
























                                        44
              Figure 7. Greg shows me his hookworm rash.

    3: Acquiring helminths, facing the law.

    It has the irony of a Twilight Zone tragedy: ifthe presence of hookworms

precludes autoimmune disease, then hookworms will beeasy to find only in the
places where they are not needed. In addition to the evolutionary rationale of

this situation, it also emerges from drug regulation laws, the pathogenic status of

these parasites, and the expense of the treatment. The affect of a store-bought

drug delivered in a tidy packag e with official FDA approval is very different
than that of the semi-legal hookworm, and inhibitive to some people, but others

who seek hookworm succeed in getting it—and may even grow closer to the

parasites because of the process involved.
    Patients in the US especially have trouble accessing worms, because laws

about experimental drug use are decidedly stricter here. Hookworms and other

helminths were determined in 2009 by the FDA to be a biological drug. They





                                         45
cannot be bought or sold in the US. The FDA website states the following on
their import laws page:

       Hookworms, Whipworms, and their eggs, and larvae used as
       immunomodulators to treat patients with allergies, asthma, autism,
       Crohn’s Disease, multiple sclerosis, Sjorgrens Syndrome, and Ulcerative
       Colitis by deliberate self infestation are considered to be biological

       products as defined in Section 351 of the Public Health Service Act. Entries
       have been declared for personal use only and are accompanied by a US
       Physician’s prescription (FDA Import Alert 57-21 2011).

   The FDA’s stance has an impact on what types of people are willing to make

their way around this regulation, even if the way around is completely legally.

Ken recounted a conversation with his helminth provider:
       people who do the treatment areway more likely to be anti-authoritarian

       or just someone who doesn’t respect the idea that comes from authority
       figures, just because the authority figure has said it. I think it’s just like, a
       psychological type [of] person. Some people are more into order and
       structured… like they think that laws should be respected, otherwise there
       would be chaos. I guess that’s their line of thought. Other people are, well,
       I think that every situation, every idea should be reconsidered on its own
       merits. … The law and order of “You shall not use this unless its been
       FDA approved”—you have to have some disregard to do it.

For Greg, it didn’t matter that the drug was untested, and he didn’t mind

confronting the authority of the FDA:

       No I didn’t even think about it. … I’m not afraid of experimenting on
       myself a little bit, because of my desperation. Yeah, desperation’ll make
       you do crazy stuff. In this case it just worked. … I got real lucky. It could
       have been a complete nonsense thing. It could have been the wrong
       parasite, or it could have been gut flora that does it entirely, not
       helminths. Or a combination of the two! It could have been an interaction
       between gut flora and… nobody knows yet!


   At the time the FDA outlawed parasite sales by private companies, the US

was hosting ongoing clinical trials of whipworm, and at least one private
company was selling whipworm and hookworm out of Santa Cruz, California.

This company, now called Autoimmune Therapies, is run by Jasper Lawrence.

The FDA promptly raided his house in 2009. He now sells helminthic therapy
from the United Kingdom to patients who can fly overseas.

   Lawrence is the first do-it-yourselfer to procure worms and use helminthic

therapy outside of a medical setting (J.A. Turton was the first. He infected


                                        46
himself to study hookworms as pathogens and was surprised when his allergies
went away (Turton 1976). Lawrence is not trained as a doctor. He’d heard about

helminths and immunology, was desperate for a cure for his allergies, and

sought out hookworms the old-fashioned way, in his case by mucking around in
human feces near a designated bathroom area in Cameroon. Once seriously

disabled by allergies, asthma, and the accompanying immunosuppressant

prednisone treatments, Lawrence was suddenly better, and with minimal side
effects. He began selling his own stock of hookworms out of his home by 2006,

and produced helminths for three years before the FDA stepped in (Adams

2010).
   Lawrence’s patients must now travel abroad for worms. It’s not illegal to do

so, but it does cost $2,000 to $4,000 out of pocket for three years guaranteed

infection—and that doesn’t include the international plane ticket. The leading
pharmaceutical immunosuppressants cost about $14,000 for a year, or $43,000

over three years, though with insurance that price becomes affordable. $3,000 for

worms can be prohibitive for some, but for some as desperate as Greg,
       Like $3,000, whatever. I don’t even care. It doesn’t even matter. I mean if
       this guy turns out to be a fraud, I didn’t even care. It was like, so what? I
       mean I’m not gonna be around to pay this bill anyway [if it doesn’t work].


One donor, Ronald, said that he didn’t want to have to go all the way overseas to

get the treatment. Luckily for him, travel overseas isn’t the only way to become a
“parasite pirate.” Some users set up home cultivation labs so they don’t have to

rely on the overseas providers, travel, and so that they can remain infected for

the cost of their home lab, which may include a quality microscope, a foam
cooler, and Petri dishes. Biologically, a human host can produce 30,000 eggs per

female hookworm per day. Some individuals even become hookworm egg

donors, sharing their hookworms’ offspring with others in need who can’t afford
the multi-thousand-dollar price tag. People can network and discuss hookworm

acquisition, cultivation, hosting, and sharing online. The Internet has played a

huge role in people’s ability to find hookworm, with many messages in
networking groups on the topic of how to acquire helminths. Hugh said






                                        47
       It’s not that difficult…. You need a microscope. You can get vermiculite or
       something else. But yeah, I know a few people who did it on their own.
       And they just couldn’t afford it. So, they got it from people that paid for it,
       and… … Now that we have modern plumbing, you really are completely
       safe.

Jill, who lives in the UK, wrote the following in an email:

       It didn’t take too long, however, to work out just how expensive obtaining
       worms would be from the two “official” providers, and at that point I had
       to discount it as an option. My condition is not in any way life
       threatening—it’s an inconvenience and a discomfort, but I’ve lived with it

       for nearly 30 years, and to me, it’s the norm. I just wasn’t desperate
       enough to spend thousands of pounds on an experiment that may not
       provide the results I hoped for. The turning point came when my 2 year
       old daughter was diagnosed with a nut allergy. We now have to avoid
       any exposure to nuts and have Epipens with us wherever we go in case of
       anaphylaxis. I thought that if I could find a donor to experiment with
       helminth therapy on myself, there could be the potential to treat her in
       future. I posted a donor request on the [internet] forum and was very
       fortunate to get a response.


   According to an informational sheet about helminthic therapy posted in an

internet group, there is at least one helminth provider that will not deny
helminths to anyone due to a clear lack of ability to pay. Besides, Jill may be in

for an easier time in the future, since a new hookworm provider,

Wormswell.com, will be providing 25 hookworms by mail for $200 to any
address (excluding US addresses). Though US citizens may still struggle to get

worms, the culture of helminths is characterized by this kind of sharing, open-

source attitude, with an open-source wiki, information- and article-sharing, and
the hookworm donor culture.

   All of this shows that the material conditions for people to acquire

hookworms are present. The type of people who will use hookworm are
becoming averse to law, but are not necessarily coming from an alternative

medicine perspective. Reaching out for hookworms comes from a combination of

patients’ desperation and hookworm’s effectiveness (see also step 0), their own
perseverance, the willingness of other humans to help them out, and finally the

availability of worms either from commercial providers or DIY hookworm
donors.





                                        48
   4: Contact, mutual conditioning, and the production of difference.
   We have now watched patients become alienated from hookworms, only to

rediscover them, ask questions, do research, and seek them out. Now, at last, we

are at the point where the patient actually applies the hookworm to their skin. At
this point, a number of biological changes take place in both a hookworm and a

human. I consider the most important affect in the human–helminth relationship

to be the impact on feelings of healthiness and sickness on the infected human
body. The production of difference relates to the ways in which animal bodies

are rendered different from others of the same species through an affective

relationship, because of contact (or lack of contact).
    In an outdoor setting, hookworm would be doing its part to make this contact

happen. After being excreted into soil, non-infective hookworm eggs transform

into infective larvae that canmigrate up to 4 feet in soil, which is why regulations
call for latrines to be dug at least 6 feet deep (Rockefeller Sanitary Commission

for the Eradication of Hookworm Disease 1911). These larvae, after they make

their way up to the surface of the soil, wave around in the air in tandem,
reaching for any contact with human skin that would allow them to move into

the body. Their chemical senses at this stage are already attuned, so they will be
able to sense when they are near a human being. In a lab setting, the hookworm

eggs are cleaned from the feces, counted so that infection occurs in the right

number, and applied to the skin once they reach the infective larval stage. A
bandage is then placed over the spot of infection, and the larvae burrow into the

skin, molting an outer layer as they go and discarding it, turned inside -out,

wedged into the surface of the skin.
    The area will soon become incredibly itchy, sometimes for months, due to our

immune system’s too-late inflammatory reaction to the invasion. In the mean

time, the hookworms make their way through the bloodstream to our lungs,
recognizing when they get there, again, with astute senses that tell them they are

being squeezed into smaller capillaries. They moving into the lungs and migrate

up the windpipe, at which point a human will get a bit of a cough. If the human
swallows any phlegm coughed up instead of spitting it, these hookworms will be

successful, and travel down the esophagus and into the stomach and intestines. If

they are spit out with the phlegm, their lives are over. Hookworms who


                                         49
complete the journey can then mature into male of female hookworms. The
females can produce up to 30,000 eggs per day. The human host becomes a

powerhouse of hookworm production.

    Over hookworms’ three-to-seven year lifespan, they both stimulate and
modulate the immune system. People with helminths live with a constant

immune response. However, hookworms secrete proteins in the body that don’t

just keep blood flowing to their mouths, but that also bind to human’s natural
killer immune cells—the same ones that cause so much inflammatory damage in

autoimmune patients (Hewitson, Grainger, and Maizels 2009). It is in the

hookworms’ best interest to call off the natural killer cells. Each hookworm will
adjust its release of chemicals according to the specific chemical balance within

an individual human being.

    Just as helminths can harm or heal, they can also cause both painful and
pleasurable side effects. According to internet forums and helminth users’ blogs,

negative side effects may be experienced intermittently for the first 90 days of

infection. “Worm flu,” may include headache, nausea, diarrhea, fatigue, vertigo,
and more. The primary positive side effect is a feeling of euphoria, also called a

“bounce” or “hookworm high,” which lasts for a few days after taking the
helminth. The hookworm high is associated with high energy and focus and

sometimes extreme relief from the immune disorder being treated. Ann, who had

infected not long before I interviewed her, toldme that
       The first couple of days, I felt really good.… But now I’m in the perfect

       storm of the side effects.

Dixie prefers helminths because

       the only side effect is gastrointestinal distress that is self-limiting and
       stops after a while.

Still, hookworms might not always settle well for everyone. Molly, who hadn’t

tried hookworms, told me “I’d always think that something foreign was inside of

me.” This could, of course, change if she were to self-infect.
    People around the world who are not purposely self-infecting and looking for

the symptoms will often not notice the hookworms’ migratory process (except
for the rash, called “ground itch”). Even patients who self-infect often don’t




                                         50
know where their hookworms are in the journey. Still, these patients do make
guesses. For Ann, following the hookworm melded with following her body’s

rhythms:


       It’s hard not to, like… maybe I have a touch of being a hypochondriac, but

       that’s what you’re like when you have a chronic disease, you’re always
       monitoring your body,but more so that way now, because I had a little
       cold for the past couple of weeks, and I was like, oh, maybe that’s the
       hookworm migrating to my lungs, and I’m coughing them up, and they’re
       going down.


   As the hookworms settle into humans’ guts, these individuals change one
another. The hookworms will themselves act differently depending upon their

host, an important side hookworm affect changing in accordance with the human

host, and feeding back to hookworm. Patients were skeptical about the taking the
liveliness out of the hookworm. For Molly:

       I guess if they were just found versus in a lab setting, I’m not sure that the
       lab one would have the same effect as the found ones.

   For Hugh:

       I just really don’t think they’ll be able to turn it into a pill, I really don’t
       think that’s possible. It’s like saying all right, let’s kill all the bacteria in
       your gut, and turn it into a pill that you take that will reproduce the
       effects of the bacteria, well that’s impossible. I mean there’s a lot of
       research happening with microbiome right now.


   For Shelly:


       I think in the case of the worms, there’s this whole sort of feedback going
       on, where they’re sensing what they’re picking up comes through your
       body and adjusting their chemistry accordingly. … Just the whole idea of
       helminths and humans, it’s just like a symbol of that whole thing of not
       understanding the complexity of systems, you know?

   The change that doctors, patients, and the media get most excited about is the

difference produced in a person’s health. Many interviewees spoke to the

powerful changes. Tori said,
       They saw what I looked like and the symptoms I have, or had, and then

       they saw me on helminths, and what I huge change it is. So there’s no
       denying that change. You can’t deny the obvious physical health that I



                                        51
       have now. So people that know me, they’re like wow. And even friends
       will say, “Are you still taking your pets or your parasites?” and I’ll say,
       “Yes.”

For Greg, the changes were profound:

       I think it’s just from not being sick, and not taking themedication all the
       time. I was very negative, very, very, very. I was, just like disaster-
       preparedness-doomer negative. And I’m still a little bit disaster-
       preparedness, but reasonable levels.


Shelly also experienced a bit of a personality change:


       Just thinking about the effect of your gut bacteria, your partners down
       there, on your mood and personality, is pretty mind-blowing, which is
       why I was given a little bit of pause with the helminths in that I’ve always
       had a pretty sunny disposition, and never had depression issues or
       anything like that, and am I potentially affecting my mood here? And
       now, I might be feeling even lazier than...! Cause it’s just like I’m on a little
       drug here, like, “Yeah, whatever, man!”


David, an Australian, was wary of his own need for helminths, but still
acknowledged their powerful effect:

       But they dropped away after six weeks, and my second dose was a couple
       of weeks late, and in those two weeks I went straight back to where I was
       before I had the worms, so I could feel that, um, you know, that extra level
       that I’d gained ... whilst the worms were actively working in my system,
       so that’s a dependence, and I don’t actually think it’s natural to have that
       dependency….


Ann mentioned that sometimes it’s not just the positive changes that matter in

helminthic therapy, but the mildness of the changes compared to
pharmaceuticals:

       You can get rid of the parasites if you need to. It’s not going to
       permanently change your body unless you want it to.


   5. Conclusion.

   Learning to be affected by hookworms isn’t about the hookworm as an agent
influencing the human as an object. It’s about the relationships that develop

between human and hookworm inside and outside of the gut. These

relationships crystallize over and over, and differently eac h time. Some of the
basic steps are discernable, though never temporally orderable. They include



                                        52
partings, meetings, and psycho-physio-social changes. The steps incorporate
human intention, but also hookworms that seek a home, news articles that cause

an excess of excitement, and drugs that stop working.

   In showing how humans learn to be affected, this chapter shows the
possibilities for the development of new, experimental therapies, in spite of the

“yuck” factor, in spite of the lack of encouragement fromdoctors, and in spite of

conclusive clinical tests. Instead, material engagements provoke outcomes that
are more than the sum of these material engagements. Recent human–hookworm

engagements waver between the inside and the outside of the dominant

framework of good, tested hookworm and bad, wild hookworm. The many guts
that are rendered different through molecular exchanges and becomings are one

of those “minoritarian spaces” that serve as a reservoir for “creative possibilities”

(Whatmore and Hinchliffe 2010, 452-453). In the next chapter, I expand this
theme. I move from how hookworms’ affect operates in the lives of patients as

they learn to be affected, to how hookworms’ affect may influence and interact

with medical institutions and do-it-yourself practice.






























                                        53
                CHAPTER FIVE: HOW HOOKWORMS BECOME
     A PART OF INSTITUTIONAL MEDICAL PRACTICE—OR EVADE IT



   The material world is not a passive background for human socialization, but
itself a part of that socialization. By considering hookworms—a part of the

material world, to be sure—as social agents, their role in the life -and-death game

of institutional medicine becomes clear. This is not to take power out of the
hands of humans and say that only the affect of the helminths can decide our

future. Rather, it is to say that helminths play a role, and must be considered

when studying the medical industry.
   People who are concerned with helminthic therapy face several challenges:

Should they press for clinical trials faster? Should they entrust helminthic

therapy to pharmaceutical companies at all? Should they focus instead on the do -
it-yourself hookworm culture that is springing up? Hookworms open up

possibilities, both for institutional medicine and for noncompliant patients. They

walk the line between public health hazard and natural medicine, between tricky
animal and promising new pharmaceutical. Through a synthesis of narrative,

interview and ethnographic data, and field notes, I show below the multivalent
way that hookworms interact with vernacular and institutional medicine. In

particular, in some ways they are a perfect fit as one of the first in the next

generation of biological medicines —aiding incorporation into institutional
medicine. In other ways, they are far too wily to be subsumed—discouraging

incorporation into institutional medicine. I propose that although hookworms do

not make a choice about whether they aid or discourage, they do set the stage for
the decisions that we end up making.



   Hookworm Aids Incorporation
   Hookworm bodies subsumed.Human and hookworm are directly involved

in the production of capital. Host and parasite play out a role that subjectifies

them as exploited producers for the medical industry.
   Hookworms engage in producing the actual molecules that are now being

sought for their immunomodulatory abilities. Each hookworm manufactures

these chemicals for its own wellbeing. It is this process that the pharmaceutical


                                       54
industry seeks to capture, if possible. Some researchers believe that the molecules
produced by helminths can be isolated an d turned into a replicable pill,

conferring the benefits of the hookworm without the public health hazard of a

reproducing infectious organism (Harnett and Harnett 2010; Ruyssers et al. 2008;
Hewitson, Grainger, and Maizels 2009). Pill form would be prefer able for

pharmaceutical companies because it would take away the air of public health

risk that surrounds helminths. Helminths themselves would not exist, and
therefore it would not be possible for them to reproduce on their own. It would

also ensure that the chemical compounds were all exactly identical, and that the

patient would get no more and no less of the compound than desired. As Dr.
Weinstock told me, tested and approved drugs need to be identical, like the

bottles of aspirin you can find in any dr ug store across the country. If helminthic

extracts became a reality (as crude versions already are), helminths themselves
could be eliminated, their work done and ready to be monetized.

    The hookworm’s body could play a double role, since it is not just a producer

of a commodity—its special immunomodulatory chemicals —but also itself a
commodity. According to some researchers, the parasite’s chemicals will not be

likely as effective as an extract. Bilbo et al. write,

       First, it is difficult to imagine a sing le pharmaceutical or even a collection
       of pharmaceuticals that could recapitulate the vast complexity of the
       interaction between helminths and the host immune system. While
       pharmaceuticals are generally directed at one component in the immune
       apparatus, a single helminth species produces dozens if not more
       molecules that each target specific components of host immunity…. Not
       only is the helminth/host interface vastly complex, it requires continuous
       input from the helminth…. Natural selection has tested countless billions
       of combinations of molecular tools over millions of years, selecting those
       that are most effective for both helminth and host survival. Quite

       obviously, no pharmaceutical has ever been developed to match that
       record (2011, 500).

    If pharmaceutical companies are able to harness parasites’ healing abilities,
and especially if they are able to control the means by which hookworms

reproduce—i.e., only in a lab and on the command of an expert —they will be

able to sell the parasite body itself. Successful trials, such as a December 2013
trial showing whipworm to improve autism symptoms (Thompson 2013) show

strides along this path.



                                         55
   Hookworm, if successfully domesticated and made replicable and profitable ,
will become further engaged in capitalist pr ocesses by its role in the stock

market. Like other pharmaceutical drugs, helminthic therapy has the power to

bolster and crash a pharmaceutical company’s stock. No clinical trials have yet
been attempted on hookworm in the US, but pig whipworm is being tested for

everything from Crohn’s disease to autism, according to ClinicalTrials.gov. One

company, Coronado Biosciences, was involved with a high -profile Crohn’s
disease trial using pig whipworm. It failed in October 2013, causing Coronado’s

stock to plummet 67 percent (Weintraub 2013). Three of my interviewees owned

stock in the company. When asked if he thought helminthic therapy should
remain non-monetized, Hugh said


   I wanna make money! And there’s no way, obviously it’s not my idea, I am
   just investing in a company. No, it’s gonna be a drug, just like anything.


Word in the internet forums is that Coronado Biosciences is simply regrouping

for another trial, one that will hopefully be more successful—the proof they point
to is how the company’s CEO bought $114,200 worth of shares in January 2014.

Even before the animal is approved for sale —in fact, even when it fails—it is
sopping up funding and generating activity in the world of speculative capital.

   It goes deeper, too. Cooper (2008) writes that the biotechnology is seen as a

solution to economic crisis that is also supposed to push back the limits to the
growth of capitalism. Economic production is relocated at the “genetic,

microbial, and cellular level, so that life becomes, literally, annexed within

capitalist processes of accumulation” (19), even displacing the primacy of
geopolitical relations.

   Hybrid experiments. The hookworm is not actually a laborer, since it doesn’t

receive monetary compensation. However, within the human body, hookworms
may become part of a hybrid systemof the social reproduction of health. There is

a hidden rolethat human bodies—often with helminths inside them—are

playing for the medical industry. This hidden role includes producing new
knowledge about medical treatments; producing more hookworms for use by

pharmaceuticals; and producing healthy bodies that are able to continue regular

human labor.


                                        56
   Human bodies are targets for monetization as subjects of medical
experimentation. Pharmaceutical companies have long found the Global South a

plentiful source of bodies for vaccine and other medical testing, with few consent

procedures and subjects for whom tests may be their only shot at medical care
(Shah 2006). But the same thing is happening, if more quietly and willingly, in

the US (aside from disasters like the Tuskegee syphilis study). The US economy

remains in need of economic development, and it is not afraid to enroll US
citizens to this end (Cooper 2008). People in the US make the perfect bodies for

new drug experiments on autoimmune diseases because these new diseases are

emerging primarily in people with particular microbiomes and diseases
consistent with “more developed” regions. This is not to say that medical

experiments don’t help people, or that clinical science isn ’t valid. However,

bioscience and capital are co-constituted in the creation of conventional medical
knowledge. Unlikely alliances like that between early HIV/AIDS patients,

libertarians, and pharmaceutical companies are an example, and hookworm use

could be another example.
   Postgenomic medicine addresses factors outside simple genetics—such as

ecology environment, and within that, microbiome diversity—in understanding
lasting effects to a person’s health. Finding the right combination of human

subject and living postgenomic treatment requires a lot of trial-and-error. When

trial-and-error is a concern, clinical trials that must be refined and repeated over
and over can become expensive. Crowdsourcing medical data in order to define,

through anecdote, appropriate hypotheses and new potential medicines, is an

up-and-coming exercise. Pharmaceutical companies are already beginning to
reverse the usual lab-to-market flow, in which lab experiments, often on animals,

then go to clinical trial and finally to the pub lic market. Instead, they are first

collecting data on the public use of both regulated and unregulated drugs from
websites such as PatientsLikeMe.com and Crohnology.com, as well as

conducting surveys among internet forum participants. Using this crowdsour     ced

data, they can then cultivate innovative drug ideas, examine possible
combination of drugs, and follow emerging side -effects that may point to new

uses for an old drug (Cooper 2014). Cooper describes this as part of the radical

end of the translationalmedicine spectrum. Translational medicine is about


                                        57
“translating” medical knowledge from the lab to the clinic in order to more
effectively and quickly get people treatment and drugs. When taken this far in

the hands of drug companies, it can actually take the experiment out of a lab

setting, instead encouraging individuals at home to experiment with
unapproved treatments, or with drugs that are approved for a completely

different use. Indeed, there are good reasons for the FDA, whatever it’s debatable

ties to the drug industry, to maintain control of helminthic therapy in order to
protect citizens. The side effects, and their frequency, are unknown. There are

anecdotes of increases in autoimmune sensitivity after helminthic therapy is

discontinued. As one helminth provider put it,
       Healthcare and medicine are the most highly regulated markets in the
       world for a reason. The consequences and costs of getting it wrong, and of

       cretinous rip-off artists, are really high, not just in terms of the damage
       they can do if their therapy is actively damaging, but again, the
       opportunity cost of not using an effective therapy—and instead using
       some bullshit one—could be enormous.


   Dove et al. writes that biological citizens are “entrepreneurial citizens who
are autonomous, self-governing and increasingly conceptualizing themselves in

biological terms and ostensibly taking responsibility for their own health” (2012,
5). Like the case of Mansfield’s seafood, responsibility for health falls onto the

backs of the public. However, unlike Mansfield’s seafood, this risk is not only

willingly taken on by citizens, it is often demanded. As during the AIDS
epidemic, autoimmune disease patients have become desperate for something

that will work as they build resistance to the drugs available. This “biological

citizenship,” or desire to self -experiment for the greater good, “is accompanied
by the rise of patient advocacy and health activism (Dove et al. 2012, 5; see also

Cooper 2008; Rose and Novas 2004).

   Ironically, the human subjects who acquire hookworm in an underground
economy or cultivate them at home outside of the commodity network are also

contributing data that may ultimately help make parasite drugs standardized,

more socially acceptable, and more easily available, at least to some. As Cooper
asserts, the questions have now become, “By what right, then, do pharmaceutical

companies retain the sole privilege of intellectual property over an experiment

that has been so rigorously outsourced?” and, how will “the unknown, visceral


                                         58
risks of self-experimentation return in the form of speculative profits and
inaccessible drug prices” (2014, no page)? The corporate-state is starting to admit

that its methods of laboratory science need to be shifted to use the innovations of

breathing, creative, contingent life to its advantage. This crowdsourced data
brings “to the fore the political determinants of health, together with the

attendant social and biological determinants” (Dove et al. 2012, 9), and uses them

for profit.
    The do-it-yourself and underground hookworm community fits this profile.

They are readily willing to share their experiences with researchers and other

patients online, and don’t see their information sharing as an activity that should
be compensated. Yet some of them see problems with the way that the

pharmaceutical industry works. Tori said,

       We know that if you read historically, many times a pill they say is not
       going to do harm, does harm, after several years of observation of people
       taking certain medications. So, I actually would stick to the worm.
       They’ve been around longer and we’ve been working together longer than
       some manufactured medication. I don’t trust the pharmaceutical
       companies either. There’s too much money wrapped up in it. I’m kind of
       disillusioned with the pharmaceutical business.

Ann said that using hookworm was like“giving an ‘F-you’ to the pharmaceutical

empire.” When asked about whether we should rely on clinical trials, Sean

Ahrens, a whipworm user and the founder of Crohnology.com, sent me a link to
Ben Goldacre’s Bad Science: How Drug Companies Mislead Doctors and Harm

Patients (2013). Ahrens wrote,

       Yes, real world effectiveness is what actually matters. Disneyland clinical
       trials [that] can be manipulated to show positive data undermine
       credibility of our current evidence base.

People go around the medical industry anyway. Ahrens founded his website so

that people could share folk knowledge, but also to inspire pharmaceutical
companies to be more effective:

       Drug companies are horribly inefficient, and the cost of clinical trials is
       causing them industry alarm. They are looking at what we are doing as
       kind of like “Star Trek.” Some of them believe what we are doing is so
       crazy it might just be the key to where the industry goes to actually learn
       about drug efficacy. But it’s so futuristic, and they are so risk-averse, I

       think they relate to us like they are watching a movie.



                                         59
Ahren’s Crohnology.com, like PatientsLikeMe.com, aggregates information on
patients’ objective and subjective experiences with experimental treatments.

Crohnology.com features 5,809 users with Crohn’s or another inflammatory

bowel disease. Of these, as of March 2014, 22 users are on hookworm, 17 are on
pig whipworm, and 39 have had a fecal transplant to replenish their

microbiomeswith someone else’s gut bacteria. Users can visit treatment pages,

where treatments like helminthic therapy, special diets, and pharmaceutical
drugs are ranked for effectiveness, compared to users’ self-assigned, zero-to-100

“health” rating, and other charts and comparative data (see figure 8). Researchers

like myself who are not conducting an official study on the site are not allowed
to access patient questions-answer pages and patient reviews of various

treatments, but these user-contributed features, plus blog posts and other

community-building pages, are available for other patients.
    The irony of helping oneself by helping pharmaceutical companies in the

right direction—corrupt as one may think they are—is inherent in all healthcare

under capitalism. Healthcare can not only become a market, it also falls into the
category of social reproduction, or the replication of conditions, like health and

children, that are necessary to maintain a class -based labor system. As Katz
writes,

       almost by definition, social reproduction…must be accomplished, and it is
       in the interests of people themselves to ensure this no matter what the
       circumstances in which they find themselves. Thus, the withdrawal of
       support for social reproduction on the part of the state, capital,and even

       civil society will be countered to whatever extent possible by household,
       familial, and individual efforts” (2001, 717-718).

Hookworm, as a tool for the social reproduction of health, inevitably becomes

part of perpetuating the capitalist system, even when cultivated at home. In fact,

home experiments with hookworm may be seen as a neoliberal method for social
reproduction, shifting the tremendous costs of preliminary research off of

pharmaceutical companies and onto financially and medically unp rotected

citizens (Cooper 2008; 2014).







                                         60
           Figure 8. A screenshot about human hookworm therapy from Crohnology.com.



    In geography, both Julie Guthman and Becky Mansfield are working on the
neoliberalization of health . Between them, they look at how bodies are enrolled

as a type of spatial fix for offloading excess capital and how the individuals

attached to these bodies are made responsible for any problems that arise
because of this spatial fix. Mansfield (2012) explores how women are to be fully

responsiblefor their mercury intake though careful seafood consumer decisions,

while the corporations that pollute fisheries are not held at all accountable for

their ruining an entire food supply. The burden of health falls onto the
individuals who are constructed as consumers being negatively affected by



                                          61
toxins in seafood rather than on the corporations that put the metals there in the
first place. Guthman (2011) explains how people with bigger bodies are said to

be obese and are framed as not taking care of their health under the input-output

calorie theory of weight gain, when in fact, the blame may fall to a toxic
environment and toxic foods. Her work focuses on how the body has become the

site for a new socioecological spatial fix —for the absorption of capital in an

already saturated economy always on the verge of crisis (under review).
   Hookworm use, whether at home or as part or as part of a new wave of

monetized biological medicines, can become useful to the medical industry, or at

least to neoliberal healthcare systems as a whole. However, in some ways, the
material and affective qualities of hookworms discourage their incorporation

into either traditional or neoliberal medicine, instead lending themselves to new

folk knowledges and a gift economy.


   Hookworm Discourages Incorporation

    How does hookworm resist incorporation into institutional medicine? In this
section, I show how hookworms are resistant to being tested and marketed. First,

however, note that the yuck factor is notone of these factors. As discussed in the
last chapter, people are sensitive to a range of hookworm affect, not just the idea

that hookworm is gross and yucky. Although people did have a strong yuck

response, it was highly flexible and could fade quickly to fascination or rolled
into “good nature.” Drug companies would therefore have no problems

marketing the hookworm. This is especially true if they were marketed as

probiotics or even helminths instead of as parasites: many of my interviewees
use terms besides “parasite” to present the topic to friends and family. Nor

would the yuck factor stand in the way of hookworm becoming a popular folk

treatment. Hookworm does, however, have physiological and lively
characteristics that cause it to falter in the face of pharmaceutical logic, making it

difficult to develop.

    First, evolutionary biology is difficult to navigate in labs research. Lab mice,
malleable as their genes may be, do not provide a comprehensive model for

immunology because they are so far removed from the kinds of epigenetic and




                                         62
microbiomic contingencies that wild animals, and even humans, experience
(Maizels and Nussey 2013).

   Second, helminths can be difficult to immediately test in clinical trials. A

properly designed clinical trial would need to test specific helminths against
specific diseases. In some cases, a combination of helminths, or helminths and

microbes, would provide the best treatment, creatinginnumerable testing

permutations. The task is even more difficult if researchers wish to get to the
specific chemical combinations that work for various diseases, since each

helminth secrets multiple types of molecules to change its human host. Each

individual human will also react differently to the individual worms, just as they
do to individual drugs and environs. Add to this how little researchers know

about the mechanisms through which helminths work. We do not even know all

of the immunomodulatory chemical compounds helminths exude in the first
place.

   Research by doctors like P’ng Loke and Joel Weinstock still forges ahead,but

the going isn’t smooth. When a recent trail using pig whipworm flopped,
internet forum users speculated that it was because the trial didn’t last long

enough for helminthic therapy to do its work. The entire trial would have to start
over. Would the project run into a similar design problems next time? For

example, Ronald, a forum user seeking a hookworm donor, could foresee long

term difficulties when choosing pig whipworm over human whipworm or
hookworm. Human-acclimated parasites are known to last longer in human

hosts. He told me in a private email,

       There is a company in Massachusetts called Coronado Biosciences who is
       doing clinical trials on TSO (pig whipworm) for Crohn’s disease. TSO can
       only live in the human body for ~ 3 weeks. … Autoimmune Therapies
       guarantees their human whipworm for 18 months, and their human
       hookworm for 3 years.

Another concern is whether pig whipworms would work as well as human

parasites, and if not, if they would taint helminthic therapy findings. Shelly said,

       But they’re using mostly or possibly all pig whipworm, and that’s not
       necessarily going to be as effective as human. There definitely are some
       worries that I’ve heard from some of these bulletin boards, that the results
       will be bad and it will be unfairly, prematu rely… [dismissed].




                                        63
Shelly thought researchers chose whipworm because they were considered less
of a public health threat:

       I’m sure it will be way easier to get a hold on pig, because their natural life
       cycle is much shorter in humans.


She also worried that certain qualities of the human hookworm would keep them

from going through testing:
       There’s a lot of speculation in the helminth community that nobody really
       wants to invest in it, because it’s gonna be hard to make money on it,
       because you can ultimately be pooping out eggs and distributing it to

       people, you know! So probably more, the money’s going in there and
       you’ve probably heard about this too, there’s people trying to extract
       whatever chemicals they produce, and make drugs from that.

   Another debate within helminthic therapy circles is whether the healing

compounds of a parasite could be extracted and turned into pill form. Inside and
outside of institutional medicine, people debate the merits and drawbacks of a

pill form for important helminth molecules, and whether this method is

plausible. Even if certain useful compounds could be isolated from a hookworm,
it might only be helpful to certain people with certain diseases, and then perhaps

only a percentage of them. A live parasite, on the other hand, with all of its many

chemical compounds intact and its ability to change its reactions depending
upon the human microbiome it inhabits, may be more universally helpful (Bilbo

et al. 2012; Adams 2010). The pill might have no side effects, though more likely,
it would simply have different side effects than the worm, as we have no way to

know how a singled-out chemical would react differently from one directly

secreted by a helminth alongside other molecules. The side effects of this
biologically-derived drug could be similar to the sometimes dangerous side

effects of biologics like Humira and Remicade.

    On the other hand, if helminths are taken up by institutional medicine as
wholes, they will require an animal in which to breed. Their intricate life cycles

cannot be completely outside their specific host species. For example, a dog

tapeworm will survive for only about 10 days in a human, while a dog
hookworm can migrate to the wrong part of the human body. A human is a

completely unfamiliar ecosystem for these parasites. Likewise, human

hookworm would have to bred inside a human being. When P’ng Loke told be


                                         64
about the pig whipworm he tests in mice, I found out that the process of
acquiring them is relatively disassociated with the clinical and lab trials

themselves. The doctor I spoke to about it would only refer to pig whipworm

breeding as “good manufacturing practice,” “factory process,” or “industrialized
process.” What happens when we turn to human hookworm production? What

would humans look like as par t of that hybrid production process?If pigs that

act as “reservoir donors” for whipworms are part of a factory process, would
human reservoir donors need the same designation? A similar question arises in

the case of fecal matter transfers, which went under FDA regulation in July 2013,

wherein donors must now undergo screening similar to those for blood donors.
   Another important question is whether helminthic therapy is actually going

to be profitable enough to garner costly clinical trials in the first place. Medicine

is doing a great job of monetizing other biotech processes, such as cloning and
genetic testing and modification, but helminthic treatment could be simple and

inexpensive to manufacture. Ronald wrote about the problem with monetizing

the therapy:
       I think it has to do with potential for profit. People can propagate their
       own hookworm once they get them the first time.With TSO [pig
       whipworm] they would be dependent on an “expensive” little salt water

       drink every 3 weeks. My first month on Humira cost the insurance
       company $9,600 for the first month. It’s all about money and greed.

   All of this shows both how hookworm may prove difficult for corporate

subsumption and how well suited it is for DIY experimentation. Where human

helminths may pose a manufacturing problem for researchers, they are relatively
easy for humans to reproduce in their own bodies at home. Where the flexibility

of hookworms may cause roadblocks to designing a pill or the pinning down

cause and effect in lab and clinical exper iments, this flexibility makes them
versatile for at-home users who wish to share with others or who are willing to

take the scattershot effect provided by helminths as long as their primary ailment

is treated.
   Do-it-yourself and underground hookworm therapy is a lively movement.

Whether the hookworm larvae come from a helminthic therapy provider
overseas or from a donor, people are using them, talking about them, and




                                        65
creating their own economies in the process. From the
OpenSourceHeminthTherapy.org wiki, which describes how people can breed

their own hookworm at home, to questions over whether to compensate a

hookworm donor monetarily, to detailed narrations of individuals’ journey with
hookworms, to very real donations of larvae-filled feces, the culture is thriving.

By one researchers’ estimates, the number of helminth users today totals in the

thousands.
   While hookworms are unlikely to overturn neoliberal medicine, they still

appeal to an “experimental” or counter-cultural medical knowledge (Davies et al.

2004). For better or worse, this leaves patients with a series of choices to make,
and an unclear future for helminthic therapy. In the next chapter, I will argue

that we can’t rely on any one movement—such as do-it-yourself hookworm

therapy—to liberate us from the mires of an unjust pharmaceutical landscape.
Individual’s access to healthcare and lawmaking will remain unequal as long as

we remained embedded in a capitalist economy. Rather, although hookworms

themselves do not make stark changes to the structure of the health care system
in the US, they do give us a chance to rethink the way we see our bodies and

animal bodies as exploitable, and to shift the conversation that we are having
away from simply “What can we do to press for a just system,” to “What can we

do within the context of hybridity (a context we cannot easily alter) tomove from

experiments benefiting neoliberal economies to experiments that truly benefit
people?”





















                                        66
                          CHAPTER SIX: DISCUSSION


   Several overarching themes emerge from my research. In this discussion, I

move through some of these themes, interpreting them in light of the theoretical
framework from Chapter Three, and offering recommendations based on these

interpretations.

   One theme that repeatedly came up in interviews and online was that
patients are heavily concerned with their place in nature. Many of their

comments had to do with the naturalness of helminthic therapy and with our

place in an ancient ecological order. This is consistent with a recent cultural turn
toward evolutionary medicine. While most people understand that “the natural

way” isn’t always the most life-preserving—they would agree that smallpox

eradication was a good thing and that antibiotics are an essential medicine —the
concept of what is in fact “natural” hasundergone a subtle change. To return to

Molly’s quote from Chapter Four, helminthic therapy is

       natural, but it doesn’t seem natural, cause you’re not, like, born with that
       naturally, but it’s natural compared to the medication you’re putting in.

   An infection-free body has, until more recently, been seen as the epitome

health (Brüssow 2013). However, the definition is changing, and patients are

leaning on this change, eager to make up for the inadequate explanation offered
by medical science about their immune disorders (Velasquez-Manoff 2012). Their

acknowledgement of this new definition of good health can go in two directions.

On the one hand, in a neoliberal twist, patients may see individuals as to blame
for their autoimmune diseases, because they or their parents hadn’t been taking

trips to the microbe-filled countryside. On the other hand, they may express a

concern with society more generally, as in the chlorination of water, the ubiquity
of antibiotics in meat, widespread urbanization, or the modern obsession with

hygiene.

   Will this trend in the fetishization of nature lead to an essentialist ideal of a
pristine human with an intact, perfected microbiome (Zuk 2013)? American Gut

(AmericanGut.org) uses volunteers to collect data on the American microbiome,
while the Earth Microbiome Project (EarthMicrobiome.org), funded by biotech




                                        67
companies, states that it wishes to “characterize the microbial taxonomic and
functional diversity” of the earth’s biomes. Will this fetishization also encourage

Westerners to seek a pristine nature from which they have been alienated,

demonizing those who, with sterile bodies that consume reckless amounts of
antibiotics, endanger public health? Concepts of nature can shift wildly (Smith

1984). But these concepts in themselves are not the driving force for change in

medical practice. Trends in discourse have a material basis. Most of the patients I
interviewed had tried pharmaceutical drugs first, and compared helminths to the

drugs. The patients were affected by the helminths for a relational reason, not

because the helminths had a “naturalness” about them, but because they had a
positive outcome.

    Concepts of nature are beholden to health, like they are to capitalist pursuits,

and health has a material basis, whatever direction the term takes. Real ailments
call out to be addressed, and even though pathologizing an “abnormality” is

itself based on problematic ideologies (Metzl and Kirkland 2010) good health

remains subjective and flexible.
    Another theme gleaned from interviews was that patients are generally

practical. They do not always stay within the confines of a predetermined
timeline regarding their treatment. Instead, when the pharmaceuticals stop

working, they seek something else, tested or not, FDA-approved or not. They

don’t always listen to an official expert, though they take scientific standards
very much into account. As Shelly put it,

       I find myself being a very, very science -minded and skeptical person. … I
       don’t consider myself someone who’s drawn to alternative medicines.


However, my interviewees did think that we can have a special connection to the

hookworms, as evidenced by the number of people who thought affectionately
about the parasites, calling them “pets” and “little guys.” Shelly went on,

       I think it had occurred to me even before the worms, just in thinking about
       how humans came together and, you know—from micro-organisms to
       humans, how we were collectives—but now it feels much more embodied,
       and the, you know, counting these little guys too….

Patients were conflicted about medical authority. They often believed there was a

place for the FDA, frustrating though its actions were, but there was also a high



                                         68
level of mistrust of the pharmaceutical companies and doctors, even when the

development of affordable drugs were seen as a necessary part of long-term
public health.

    If you measure this science-mindedness and confusion about medical

authority next to the propensity to affiliate deeply with the parasites, you can see

how the worms gave rise to multiple angles of association. The politics of
helminthic therapy is thus materially and affectively derived. Patients are not

simply following in the path handed them by one particular institution.

Experience mattered. But it’s not just that experience mattered,it’s that experience
was mattered. People did not act in accordance with what was safe or what was

clean, they were driven to act by their physical needs. This is not to reduce their

actions to a mere response to the physical. People did have a series of decisions
to make, but they were constrained by the site in which they were embedded,

one with lively companions who could harm or heal, but one in which they faced

severe consequences for inaction.

    Human and hookworm are part of a bodymap of relationality (Woodward
and Lea 161). However, in the case of helminthic therapy, instead of looking for

affect emerging from the relationships strung between the inside of the body

(thought, emotion, molecular change, physical pleasure and pain) and the
outside (other mammals, exciting or everyday events, institutions), we find a

power in the proximity of the relationship happening within the human body—
                                   7
between human and hookworm. The differences made in mood, physical
comfort, and political possibilities—the affect—associated with gut health allows

people to manifest more possibilities for the future of the human body than a

simplified assumption about human nature, even if that human nature is

conceived as altruistic. Further, their material actions—the reproduction of a
worm, a shared microbiome, a happier body—made a bigger impact on Crohn’s

disease treatments than verbal demands for treatment grounded in ethical

philosophy, since a philosophy of wellness already dominates this society.
    To illustrate the generative potential of the material and the affective, let me

convey a couple of scenarios. In one of these speculations, emergence and affect

7
 The many microbial bacteria living in the gut may be deeply enmeshed with the human –
helminth relationship as well (Walk et al. 2010).


                                          69
are down-weighted. In the other, they are central. Each points to different
possibilities. First, suppose we consider that our future prioritizes

representational abstractions like human nature and free will over emergent,

multi-directional affective relationships that promote health. In the case of
helminthic therapy, we could imagine some altruistic humans kindly sharing

hookworms with each other until they are nearly shut down. However, they

would continue to speak out about the importance of hookworms, and even get
themselves in trouble by attempting to ensure that everyone had access to the

animals. Meanwhile, other people might be blaming themselves for their

sicknesses or looking for someone to blame. If only they’d been less stressed out,
or if only they’d had the money for a genetic test, or if only they had made sure

to drink from fresh springs to diversify their microbiomes! Or perhaps it’s not

the individual who is responsible, perhaps it’s a society -wide neglect of natural
health! Holding one party accountable is difficult and doesn’t capture all of the

factors at work, nor does it point toward a noncapitalized way forward.

    Now, let us take an assemblage perspective where the material and affective
are central. Americans get used to detesting the idea of parasites through a series

of anti-parasitic hygiene practices implemented in the beginning of the twentieth
century. However, some of them develop autoimmune disease, in part because

of these hygiene laws as well as genetic predisposition, personal stresses, and the

anxiety of advanced industrial society. Some researchers and some citizens begin
to uncover a particularrelationship—the one between humans and helminths—

as an interesting piece of the puzzle, and wonder what can be done to restore it.

They begin to experiment with helminthic therapy, each in their own ways. The
hookworms, as explained in this thesis, lend themselves to the do -it-yourselfers

as well as to the medical establishment, and citizens have a choice about where

they want to turn for help. If they turn in the do-it-yourself direction, they will
face a series of challenges: how to cultivate the worms?How to communicate

with one another and share supplies safely? How to navigate unknown, long-

term side effects? How to support others who are afraid of hookworms, or who
are too poor to get them? If they turn toward institutional medicine, they will

face another series of challenges: How to get doctors and researchers on board?

How to make the worms profitable for pharmaceutical companies? What to do


                                         70
about the difficulty of testing human parasites? The importance, however, is that
this is not a moral dilemma, where the patients’ job is to convince others to take

on the burden of fighting against a unidirectional flow of power, but rather a

place where more open-ended action, whether insurgent or accommodating, can
rewrite the status quo.

   As these speculations show, assemblage ties together economic, social

constructivist, and biopolitical theories. All three angles engage one another, as I
pointed out in Chapter Three. Biopolitics appeals not just to the economy of

biopower produced by humans and helminths, but also to the imperative of life

that makes modern medicine sacrosanct. This imperative for health is socially
constructed, but it’s also the result of material forces, since it is triggered and

reinscribed by infections and autoimmune diseases that cause pain. Social

constructions of animal discourse, such as the cute hookworm versus the
disgusting hookworm, also come from material interactions—a healed body, a

hurting body—as well as from the literature of capital-seeking businesses like the

New York Times and AutoimmuneTherapies.com. Even websites such as
OpenSourceHelminthTherapy.org, a wiki that allows users to share information,

are formed from human–helminth and human–human relationships, poverty,
internet access, and a belief in mutual aid, rather than from one aspect alone.

   It would be easy to reduce this human–helminth assemblage to the simple

idea that everything is connected, but even that perspective is missing out on an
important element—unpredictability. This assemblage is not merely complic ated

and it is not predictable with the right formula. It is contingent, and radically

open. While conventional medicine could continue along the same channels—
bioprospecting, bioengineering, developing, testing and marketing —it doesn’t

have to. Discoveries in postgenomics and microbiomics and the deepening of a

self-diagnosing internet culture (Julavits 2014), stands ready to change the game.
The question is, how will we shape our medical future?

   Hookworms may serve as part of an anti-politics machine when they are a

pathogen to be eradicated (Ferguson 1990), but as a treatment, they bring into
focus questions about economic disparity, mutual aid, social constructions, the

value of human health, the instability of the medical expert and biopolitical

governance. My interviewees questioned all of these factors as they rewrote the


                                        71
rules. They are becoming a new kind of folk experts, and it is in the interest of
pharmaceutical companies and medical researchers to follow the results of do-it-

yourself treatments. For public health, this may seem a risky strategy, especially

when dealing with a pathogen. However, as we know, pharmaceutical
companies regularly take risks when testing new drugs in the US and abroad.

Do-it-yourself helminthic therapy puts this risk in the direct control of citizens

rather than pharmaceutical companies—perhaps a boon to patients, but also with
potentially enormous benefit to pharmaceutical companies. Rather than allowing

the pharmaceutical companies to profit from the experimentation of citizens, or

on the other hand, to cut patients off from their desired, untested treatments,
public health and governmental institutions could begin to provide further

protections to patients. These protections would not be from the corporate

development of new drugs, but from the enormous profit margins that
pharmaceutical companies stand to make from these new drugs without

recompense to citizens. Patients need these protections in an atmosphere that

could quickly turn hostile as helminths become a more controlled substance.
   I argue that human and hookworm affect, not a human subjectivity that

positions humans as primary agents in a mind-over-matter politics, is what could
be responsible for a turn away from pharmaceuticals and conventional medicine,

and toward a do-it-yourself movement. Because of the multivalence of

hookworms, people do not see hookworms solely as companions or charming
pets. Human subjectivity is forced to break apart because humans—the self-

experimenting humans, in particular —don’t have total control over hookworms.

As the hookworms pass through skin, they become a part of us, not heroes or
enemies, but both caring and selfish, giving and fallible. Parasites represent a far

more challenging break in our monism, one that may challenge us to revisit the

ways that we live among all other nonhumans.
   A theme that grazed my research somewhat indirectly was the way that

helminthic therapy is classed. Not only is helminthic therapy generally

necessitated and practiced in only in developed countries, but also most of the
patients I interviewed were middle income. Though this could partly be a bias

from internet selection, it is also, in part, because not everyone can afford to go

against a doctor’s advice, take time off for an experiment, do hours of internet


                                        72
research, or afford risk their reputation with the stigma of helminths. My
interviewees, and likely helminth users in general, are a selective group.

Autoimmune disease is an invisible malady that has often struck wealthier

people first, perhaps beginning with the fashionable gentleman’s ailment of hay
fever in the 1800s—can a middle class disease ever be one that breeds radical

social reforms? Helminthic therapy can be a DIY treatment, which confronts the

face of capitalist medicine, but it cou ld also become a boutique treatment, in
which the wealthy get to select the most organic and perfectly evolved helminths

money can buy. Helminthic therapy could be a new answer to ailments that are

increasingly affecting the poor more than the rich, or it could become a money
cow for pharmaceutical companies that outsource their preliminary testing to

citizens who rely on free message boards for medical advice. The extent to which

these therapies may exacerbate class difference and health inequalities remains to
be seen. Yet, taken to their logical conclusion, there’s no way that the

contingencies within this assemblage don’t open doors of possibility for

changing the way that we do medicine. It is thus important to continue
politicizing the debates about bioethics and medicine.

    When I write “politicizing,” however, I don’t mean treading over the same
political territory we are used to, such as which regulations should be in place,

which politician is really supporting patients, or who is to blame for the health

care crisis in the US. Rather, by politics, I mean raising awareness of the agency
that human and hookworm together create in terms of making concrete, material

changes in peoples lives.

    While many people are focused on reconstructing our subjectivity in terms of
our many identities, I argue that material experiences, including ones in which

humans cannot be categorized by a single identity, paves the way for trumping

the essentialist, black-and-white modes of thinking and revises concepts of
unidirectional power—that of human over hookworm or that of industry over

people. Instead, we are able to show our integral place in those assemblages we

are not happy with, and using our material experiences with the nonhuman, we
are able to reterritorialize themtogether.






                                         73
                              APPENDIX


Primary questions for patients:

1. Tell me about your medical background.
2. Tell me about your relationship with doctors.
3. What did your family think?

4. Have you always been into alternative medicine? Is HT alternative medicine?
5. What’s the difference between alternative and conventional medicine?
6. What do you think about the "yuck" factor?
7. Briefly, how do you see the worms as working?
8. How do anecdotes compared to scientific studies? How and in what ways are
    they important?
9. Would you consider home cultivation? Would you share with a friend if they
    were desperate and couldn’t get the worms overseas?
10. Any long term solutions for rising autoimmune disease worldwide?
11. Live worms vs. chemical pill versions: which would you prefer?

12. Different opinions about patients taking on risk country-to-country, different
    levels of regulation… do you think the FDA should make it easier to access
    untested drugs at the risk of the patient? What is the patient’s role in making
    decisions? How informed can a patient be?
13. Social media’s importance?
14. Where do you get your information? How can you trust it?


Questions for helminthic therapy researchers and doctors:


1. Is there a role for anecdotes, patient stories, in your work?
2. When did you shift from studying helminths as harmful to helminths as
    helpful?
3. Can we duplicate the effects of helminths in a lab? In pill form?
4. I’ve heard that helminths change according to their hosts…?
5. Describe what’s happening from the worm’s perspective.
6. What is an ideal outcome from this research?
7. Can helminths still be considered parasites, technically?
8. Do you think that people will ever get over the “yuck” factor?
9. Do the benefits of HT outweigh the drawbacks?

10. What is the difference between HT and other treatments?
11. Is it hard to find funding?












                                   74
                                  REFERENCES


Adams, T. 2010. Gut instinct: the miracle of the parasitic hookworm.the Guardian
23 May. http://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/may/23/parasitic-
hookworm-jasper-lawrence-tim-adams (last accessed 23 August 2013).

American Autoimmune Related Diseases Association, Inc. Autoimmune

Statistics: Autoimmune Disease Fact Sheet. American Autoimmune Related Diseases
Association, Inc.http://www.aarda.org/autoimmune-information/autoimmune-
statistics/.

Anderson, B. 2009. Affective atmospheres. Emotion, Space and Society 2 (2):77–81.

Bach, J.-F. 2002. The Effect of Infections on Susceptibility to Autoimmune and
Allergic Diseases.New England Journal of Medicine347 (12):911–920.

Bakker, K. 2010. The limits of “neoliberal natures”: Debating green neoliberalism.
Progress in Human Geography34 (6):715–735.

Barad, K. 2003. Posthumanist Performativity: Toward an Understanding of How
Matter Comes to Matter. Signs28 (3):801–831.


Barton, E. S., D. W. White, J. S. Cathelyn, K. A. Brett -McClellan, M. Engle, M. S.
Diamond, V. L. Miller, and H. W. Virgin. 2007. Herpesvirus latency confers
symbiotic protection from bacterial infection.Nature 447 (7142):326–329.

Beggs, P. J. 2004. Impacts of climate change on aeroallergens: past and future.
Clinical & Experimental Allergy 34 (10):1507–1513.

Bennett, J. 2005. The Agency of Assemblages and the North American Blackout.
Public Culture 17 (3):445–466.

———. 2010. Vibrant matter: a political ecology of things. Durham: Duke University
Press.

Bilbo, S. D., G. A. Wray, S. E. Perki ns, and W. Parker. 2011. Reconstitution of the

human biome as the most reasonable solution for epidemics of allergic and
autoimmune diseases. Medical Hypotheses 77 (4):494–504.

Bingham, N. 2006. Bees, butterflies, and bacteria: biotechnology and the politics
of nonhuman friendship. Environment and Planning A 38 (3):483–498.

Bingham, N., and S. Hinchliffe. 2008. Reconstituting natures: Articulating other
modes of living together. Geoforum39 (1):83–87.

Bickler, S. W., and A. DeMaio. 2008. Western diseases: current concepts and
implications for pediatric surgery research and practice. Pediatric Surgery
International 24 (3):251–255.




                                        75
Bird, J., B. Curtis, M. Mash, T. Putnam, G. Robertson, and L. Tickner. 1996.
Futurenatural: Nature, Science, Culture. Routledge.

Birn, A. E., and A. Solórzano. 1999. Public health policy paradoxes: science and
politics in the Rockefeller Foundation’s hookworm campaign in Mexico in the
1920s. Social science & medicine (1982) 49 (9):1197–1213.

Bourbontrails. 2009. GEEcology: Parasightings. GEEcology.
http://geecology.blogspot.com/2009/12/parasightings.html (last accessed 16

December 2013).

Braun, B. 2007. Biopolitics and the molecularization of life. Cultural Geographies 14
(1):6–28.

Braun, B. 2008. Environmental issues: inventive life. Progress in Human Geography
32 (5):667–679.

Broadhurst, M. J., A. Ardeshir, B. Kanwar, J. Mirpuri, U. M. Gundra, J. M. Leung,
K. E. Wiens, I. Vujkovic-Cvijin, C. C. Kim, F. Yarovinsky, N. W. Lerche, J. M.
McCune, and P. Loke. 2012. Therapeutic Helminth Infection of Macaques with
Idiopathic Chronic Diarrhea Alters the Inflammatory Signature and Mucosal
Microbiota of the Colon. PLoS Pathogens8 (11).


Brown, E. R. 1976. Public health in imperialism: early Rockefeller programs at
home and abroad. American Journal of Public Health 66 (9):897–903.

Brüssow, H. 2013. Minireview: What is health? Microbial Biotechnology 6 (4):341–
348.

Buller, H. 2014. Animal geographies I. Progress in Human Geography 38 (2):308–
318.

Butler, J. 2006. Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity1 edition.
New York: Routledge.

Castree, N. 2000. Marxism and the Production of Nature. Capital & Class24 (3):5–
36.


Centers for Disease Control andPrevention. 2011. Inflammatory Bowel Disease
(IBD). Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. http://www.cdc.gov/ibd/.

Chalmers, J. 2012. Craftster Pick of the Week - Petskin’s Tapeworms. Mr X Stitch.
http://www.mrxstitch.com/craftster-pick-of-the-week-petskins-tapeworms/.

Combes, C. 2001. Parasitism: the ecology and evolution of intimate interactions;
translated by Isaure de Buron and Vincent A. Connors !; with a new foreword by Daniel
Simberloff. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Cooper, M. 2008. Life as surplus: biotechnology and capitalism in the neoliberal .ra

Seattle: University of Washington Press.


                                          76
———. 2014. The Labor of Distributed Experiment: User-Generated Drug
Innovation. In Clinical labor: tissue donors and research subjects in the global
bioeconomy, Experimental futures., ed. C. Waldby. Durham: Duke University
Press.

Cooper, M. 2012. The Pharmacology of Distributed Experiment- User-generated
Drug Innovation.Body & Society 18 (3-4):18–43.

Corbin, J. M., Strauss, and A. L. Strauss. 2008. Basics of qualitative research:

techniques and procedures for developing grounded theor. Los Angeles, Calif.: Sage
Publications.

Coronado Biosceinces. Hygiene Hypothesis. Coronado Biosciences.
http://www.coronadobiosciences.com/research-development/hygiene-
hypothesis.cfm.

Correale, J., and M. Farez. 2007. Association between parasite infection and
immune responses in multiple sclerosis. Annals of neurology 61 (2):97–108.

Croese, J., J. O’Neil, J. Masson, S. Cooke, W. Melrose, D. Pritchard, and R. Speare.
2006. A proof of concept study establishing Necator americanus in Crohn’s
patients and reservoir donors. Gut 55 (1):136–137.


D’Haens, G. 2007. Risks and benefits of biologic therapy for inflammatory bowel
diseases. Gut 56 (5):725–732.

Davies, G. 2012. Caring for the multiple and the multitude: assembling animal
welfare and enabling ethical critique. Environment and Planning D: Society and
Space 30 (4):623–638.

Davies, G., R. Day, and S. Williamson. 2004. The geography of health
knowledge/s.Health & Place 10 (4):293–297.

Deleuze, G., and F. Guattari. 1987. A thousand plateaus: capitalism and schizophrenia.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Despommier, D. D., and F. by W. C. Campbell. 2013. People, Parasites, and

Plowshares: Learning From Our Body’s Most Terrifying Invaders. Columbia
University Press.

Despret, V. 2004. The Body We Care for: Figures of Anthropo-zoo-genesis. Body
& Society 10 (2-3):111–134.

Dove, E. S., S. A. Faraj, E. Kolker, and V. Özdemir. 2012. Designing a post-
genomics knowledge ecosystem to translate pharmacogenomics into public
health action. Genome Medicine 4 (11):91.

Emara, M. H. 2013. Impact of Treatment of Intestinal Parasites on the Activity of
Ulcerative Colitis. Afro-Egyptian Journal of Infectious and Endemic Diseases 3 (3):96–
104.



                                         77
Ettling, J. 1981. The germ of laziness: Rockefeller philanthropy and public health in the
New South. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

FDA Import Alert 57-21. 2011. U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/cms_ia/importalert_159.html (last accessed 4
March 2014).

Ferguson, J. 1990. The Anti-politics Machine: “development,” Depoliticization, and
Bureaucratic Power in Lesotho. CUP Archive.


Flohr, C., L. N. Tuyen, S. Lewis, R. Quinnell, T. T. Minh, H. T. Liem, J. Campbell,
D. Pritchard, T. T. Hien, J. Farrar, H. Williams, and J. Britton. 2006. Poor
sanitation and helminth infection protect against skin sensitization in Vietnamese
children: A cross-sectional study.The Journal of allergy and clinical immunology 118
(6):1305–1311.

Foucault, M. 2009. Security, Territory, Population: Lectures at the Collège de France
1977--1978 1st ed. ed. M. Senellart. Picador.

———. 1973. The birth of the clinic; an archaeology of medical perception. New York:
Pantheon Books.

Goldacre, B. 2013. Bad pharma: how drug companies mislead doctors and harm

patients.

Goldmuntz, E., and A. S. Penn. 2012. Autoimmune Diseases Fact Sheet.
WomensHealth.gov. http://womenshealth.gov/publications/our           -
publications/fact-sheet/autoimmune-diseases.html (last accessed 23 August
2013).

Gorelick, R. 2004. Neo-Lamarckian medicine. Medical Hypotheses 62 (2):299–303.

Graham, J. K. G., and G. Roelvink. 2010. An Economic Ethics for the
Anthropocene. Antipode 41:320–346.

Greenhough, B. 2012. Where species meet and mingle: endemic human-virus
relations, embodied communication and more-than-human agency at the

Common Cold Unit 1946-90. cultural geographies 19 (3):281–301.

Guthman, J. Under review. Binging and Purging: Agro-food Capitalism and the
Body as Socio-Ecological Fix. Environment and Planning A .

———. 2011. Weighing In: Obesity, Food Justice, and the Limits of Capitalism 1st ed.
Berkeley: University of California Press.

Hadley, C. 2006. Food allergies on the rise? EMBO reports 7 (11):1080–1083.

Hamilton, J. 2010. Eat Your Worms: The Upside Of Parasites. NPR.org.
http://www.npr.org/2010/12/02/131753267/eat-your-worms-the-upside-of-
parasites (last accessed 18 March 2014).



                                         78
Haraway, D. J. 2007. When Species Meet. Minneapolis: University Of Minnesota
Press.

Harnett, W., and M. M. Harnett. 2010. Helminth-derived immunomodulators:
can understanding the worm produce the pill? Nature Reviews Immunology10
(4):278–284.

Hayden, C. 2003. When nature goes public: the making and unmaking of bioprospecting
in Mexico / Cori Hayden. Princeton: Princeton University Press.


Hewitson, J. P., J. R. Grainger, and R. M. Maizels. 2009. Helm inth
immunoregulation: the role of parasite secreted proteins in modulating host
immunity. Molecular and biochemical parasitology167 (1):1–11.

Hinchliffe, S., M. B. Kearnes, M. Degen, and S. Whatmore. 2005. Urban wild
things: a cosmopolitical experiment.Environment and Planning D: Society and
Space 23 (5):643–658.

Hinchliffe, S., and S. Whatmore. 2006. Living cities: Towards a politics of
conviviality. Science as Culture 15 (2):123–138.

Hotez, P. J., D. A. P. Bundy, K. Beegle, S. Brooker, L. Drake, N. de Silva, A.
Montresor, D. Engels, M. Jukes, L. Chitsulo, J. Chow, R. Laxminarayan, C.

Michaud, J. Bethony, R. Correa-Oliveira, X. Shuhua, A. Fenwick, and L. Savioli.
2006. Helminth Infections: Soil-transmitted Helminth Infections and
Schistosomiasis. In Disease Control Priorities in Developing Countries, eds. D. T.
Jamison, J. G. Breman, A. R. Measham, G. Alleyne, M. Claeson, D. B. Evans, P.
Jha, A. Mills, and P. Musgrove. Washington (DC): World Bank
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK11748/ (last accessed 16 December
2013).

James, W. 1890. The principles of psychology. Vol. II Vol. II. London: Macmillan.

Julavits, H. 2014. Diagnose This. Harper’s Magazine.
http://harpers.org/archive/2014/04/diagnose-this/ (last accessed 3 April

2014).

Kaplan, M. 2009. Healing with parasites. New Scientist203 (2716):42–45.

Kass, L. R. 1997. The wisdom of repugnance: why we should ban the cloning of
humans. New republic (New York, N.Y.)216 (22):17–26.

Katz, C. 2001. Vagabond Capitalism and the Necessity of Social Reproduction.
Antipode 33 (4):709–728.

Keim, B. 2012. Q&A: Parasites, Modern Life and Immune Systems Gone
Haywire. Wired Science.
http://www.wired.com/wiredscience/2012/09/epidemic           -of-absence/ (last
accessed 16 March 2013).




                                         79
Koloski, N. A., L. Bret, and G. Radford- Smith. 2008. Hygiene hypothesis in
inflammatory bowel disease: A critical review of the literature. World Journal of
Gastroenterology: WJG14 (2):165–173.

Kondrashova, A., T. Seiskari, J. Ilonen, M. Knip, and H. Hyöty. 2013. The
“Hygiene hypothesis” and the sharp gradient in the incidence of autoimmune
and allergic diseases between Russian Karelia and Finland. APMIS: acta
pathologica, microbiologica, et immunologica Scandinavica 121 (6):478–493.


Latimer, J. 2013. Being Alongside: Rethinking Relations amongst D ifferent Kinds.
Theory, Culture & Society30 (7-8):77–104.

Latour, B. 2004. How to Talk About the Body? the Normative Dimension of
Science Studies. Body & Society 10 (2-3):205–229.

Lichtenstein, G. R., B. G. Feagan, R. D. Cohen, B. A. Salzberg, R. H. Diamo nd, D.
M. Chen, M. L. Pritchard, and W. J. Sandborn. 2006. Serious infections and
mortality in association with therapies for Crohn’s disease: TREAT registry.
Clinical gastroenterology and hepatology: the official clinical practice journal of the
American Gastroenterological Association4 (5):621–630.

Like, A. A., D. L. Guberski, and L. Butler. 1991. Influence of environmental viral

agents on frequency and tempo of diabetes mellitus in BB/Wor rats. Diabetes 40
(2):259–262.

Loftus, E. V., Jr. 2004. Clinical epidemiology of inflammatory bowel disease:
Incidence, prevalence, and environmental influences. Gastroenterology126
(6):1504–1517.

Logan, I., and C. L. Bowlus. 2010. The geoepidemiology of autoimmune
intestinal diseases. Autoimmunity Reviews 9 (5):A372–A378.

Lorimer, H. 2008. Cultural geography: non-representational conditions and
concerns. Progress in Human Geography32 (4):551–559.

Lorimer, H. 2006. Herding memories of humans and animals. Environment and

Planning D: Society and Space 24 (4):497 – 518.

Lorimer, J. 2007. Nonhuman charisma. Environment and Planning D: Society and
Space 25 (5):911–932.

Loukas, A., and P. Prociv. 2001. Immune Responses in Hookworm Infections.
Clinical Microbiology Reviews 14 (4):689–703.

Maizels, R. M., and D. H. Nussey. 2013. Into the wild: digging at immunology’s
evolutionary roots. Nature Immunology14 (9):879–883.

Mansfield, B. 2012. Environmental Health as Biosecurity: “Seafood Choices,”
Risk, and the Pregnant Woman as Threshold. Annals of the Association of American
Geographers 102 (5):969–976.



                                          80
McCormack, D. P. 2007a. Molecular affects in human geographies. Environment
and Planning A 39 (2):359–377.

———. 2007b. Molecular affects in human geographies. Environment and Planning
A 39 (2):359–377.

McFall-Ngai, M., M. G. Hadfield, T. C. G. Bosch, H. V. Carey, T. Domazet -Loso,
A. E. Douglas, N. Dubilier, G. Eberl, T. Fukami, S. F. Gilbert, U. Hentschel, N.
King, S. Kjelleberg, A. H. Knoll, N. Kremer, S. K. Mazmanian, J. L. Metcalf, K.

Nealson, N. E. Pierce, J. F. Rawls, A. Reid, E. G. Ruby, M. Rumpho, J. G. Sanders,
D. Tautz, and J. J. Wernegreen. 2013. Animals in a bacterial world, a new
imperative for the life sciences. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 110
(9):3229–3236.

Metzl, J., and A. R. Kirkland. 2010. Against health: how health became the new
morality. New York: New York University Press.

Moffatt, B., and C. Elliott. 2007. Ghost Marketing: Pharmaceutical Companies
and Ghostwritten Journal Articles.Perspectives in Biology and Medicine 50 (1):18–
31.

Mol, A. 2002. The Body Multiple: Ontology in Medical Practice. Duke University

Press.

Mozeson, M., and E. Shakhnovich. 2013. How to Succeed in Autoimmune: New
Approaches for a Unique Disease Space. Marsh & McLennen Companies: Oliver
Wyman. http://www.oliverwyman.com/media/Oliver_Wyman_-
_How_to_Succeed_in_Autoimmune.pdf (last accessed 3 May 2013).

Naslund, S. 2012. Portraits of Parasites: Geographic Imaginaries in the
Production of Health Knowledge.
https://digital.lib.washington.edu/researchworks/handle/1773/20893 (last
accessed 25 April 2013).

National Institutes of Health. 2012. Autoimmune Diseases.

http://www.niehs.nih.gov/health/materials/autoimmune_diseases_508.pdf.

Nesse, R. M., C. T. Bergstrom, P. T. Ellison, J. S. Flier, P. Gluckman, D. R.
Govindaraju, D. Niethammer, G. S. Omenn, R. L. Perlman, M. D. Schwartz, M. G.
Thomas, S. C. Stearns, and D. Valle. 2009. Colloquium Paper: Making
evolutionary biology a basic science for medicine. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences107 (suppl_1):1800–1807.

Niemelä, J. 2011. What Puts the “yuck” in the Yuck Factor? Bioethics 25 (5):267–
279.

Okada, H., C. Kuhn, H. Feillet, and J.-F. Bach. 2010. The “hygiene hypothesis” for
autoimmune and allergic diseases: an update. Clinical & Experimental Immunology

160 (1):1–9.



                                         81
Parker, W., S. E. Perkins, M. Harker, and M. P. Muehlenbein. 2012. A
prescription for clinical immunology: the pills are available and ready for testing.
A review. Current Medical Research and Opinion28 (7):1193–1202.

Pennisi, E. 2010. Body’s Hardworking M icrobes Get Some Overdue Respect.
Science 330 (6011):1619–1619.

———. 2013. How Do Microbes Shape Animal Development? Science340
(6137):1159–1160.


Pile, S. 2010. Emotions and affect in recent human geography. Transactions of the
Institute of British Geographers 35 (1):5–20.

Pollan, M. 2013. Say Hello to the 100 Trillion Bacteria That Make Up Your
Microbiome.The New York Times 15 May.
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/05/19/magazine/say-hello-to-the-100-trillion-
bacteria-that-make-up-your-microbiome.html (last accessed 17 May 2013).

Pritchard, D. 2009. Can Parasites Be Good for You? The Biochemist 31 (4):28–31.

Richards, S. 2012. Can Worms Alleviate Autism? | The Scientist Magazine®. The
Scientist. http://www.the-
scientist.com/?articles.view/articleNo/33463/title/Can   -Worms-Alleviate-

Autism-/ (last accessed 15 March 2013).

Robbins, P., and B. Marks. 2010. Assemblage Geographies. In The SAGE Handbook
of Social Geographies, ed. S. Smith. SAGE Publications.

Roberts, D. 2010. The Social Immorality of Health in the Gene Age: Race,
Disability, and Inequality. In Against health: how health became the new morality,
eds. J. Metzl and A. R. Kirkland. New York: New York University Press.

Rockefeller Sanitary Commission for the Eradication of Hookworm Disease.
1911. Publication - The Rockefeller Sanitary Commission for the Eradication of
Hookworm Disease.

Rose, N., and C. Novas. 2004. Biological citizenship. In Global assemblages:

technology, politics, and ethics as anthropological problems, eds. A. Ong and S. J.
Collier, 439–463. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.

Rutherford, S., and P. Rutherford. 2013. Geography and Biopolitics. Geography
Compass 7 (6):423–434.

Ruyssers, N. E., B. Y. De Winter, J. G. De Man, A. Loukas, A. G. Herman, P. A.
Pelckmans, and T. G. Moreels. 2008. Worms and the Treatment of Inflammatory
Bowel Disease: Are Molecules the Answer? Clinical and Developmental
Immunology 2008:1–7.

Saldanha, A. 2006. Reontologising race: the machinic geography of phenotype.
Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 24 (1):9–24.



                                        82
Scott, C. A., P. F. Robbins, and A. C. Comrie. 2012. The Mutual Conditioning of
Humans and Pathogens: Implications for Integrative Geographical Scholarship.
Annals of the Association of American Geographers 102 (5):977–985.

Shah, S. 2006. The body hunters: how the drug industry tests its products on the world’s
poorest patients. New York; York: New Press.

Shattuck, S. 2013. Parasites: A User’s Guide DVD.

Sher, A., R. T. Gazzinelli, I. P. Oswald, M. Clerici, M. Kullberg, E. J. Pearce, J. A.

Berzofsky, T. R. Mosmann, S. L. James, and H. C. Morse 3rd. 1992. Role of T -cell
derived cytokines in the downregulation of immune responses in parasitic and
retroviral infection.Immunological reviews 127:183–204.

Smith, N. 2007. Nature as Accumulation Strategy. Socialist Register 16.

———. 2008. Uneven Development: Nature, Capital, and the Production of Space.
University of Georgia Press.

Smullyan, J. 2009. Parasites. http://www.radiolab.org/story/91689-
parasites/?utm_source=sharedUrl&utm_media=metatag&utm_campaign=share
dUrl (last accessed 3 April 2014).

Stallins, J. A. 2012. Scale, causality, and the new organism–environment

interaction. Geoforum43 (3):427–441.

Strachan, D. P. 1989. Hay fever, hygiene, and household size. British Medical
Journal 299 (6710):1259–1260.

Summers, R. W., D. E. Elliott, J. F. Urban Jr, R. Thompson, and J. V. Weinstock.
2005a. Trichuris suis therapy in Crohn’s disease. Gut54 (1):87–90.

Summers, R. W., D. E. Elliott, J. F. Urban Jr, R. A. Thompson, and J. V. Weinstock.
2005b. Trichuris suis therapy for active ulcerative colitis: A randomized
controlled trial. Gastroenterology 128 (4):825–832.

Svoboda, E. 2008. Can hookworms protect against allergies?- The New York
Times. The New York Times 1 July.

http://www.nytimes.com/2008/07/01/health/01iht-
01prof.14122951.html?pagewanted=2&_r=2& (last accessed 7 September 2013).

Thomas, F., S. P. Daoust, and M. Raymond. 2012. Can we understand modern
humans without considering pathogens?: Human evolution and parasites.
Evolutionary Applications5 (4):368–379.

Thompson, D. 2013. Could a Tiny Worm Help Treat Autism?
http://health.usnews.com/health-news/news/articles/2013/12/12/could-a-
tiny-worm-help-treat-autism?page=2 (last accessed 16 December 2013).





                                        83
Tilp, C., V. Kapur, W. Loging, and K. J. Erb. 2013. Prerequisites for the
pharmaceutical industry to develop and commercialise helminths and helminth -
derived product therapy.International Journal for Parasitology43 (3–4):319–325.

Trowell, H. C., and D. P. Burkitt eds. 1981. Western Diseases, Their Emergence and
Prevention. Harvard University Press.

Turton, J. 1976. IgE, Parasites, and Allergy. The Lancet 308 (7987):686.

United States Country Life Commission, and L. H. Bailey. 1909. Report of the

Country life commission. Govt. print. off.

USAID. 2012a. Hookworm. USAID’s Neglected Tropical Diseases Program.
http://www.neglecteddiseases.gov/target_diseases/soil_transmitted_helminthi
asis/hookworm/.

———. 2012b. Target Diseases, Soil-Transmitted Helminthiasis, Hookworm.
USAID’s Neglected Tropical Disease Program.
http://www.neglecteddiseases.gov/target_diseases/soil_transmitted_helminthi
asis/hookworm/index.html.

Velasquez-Manoff, M. 2012. An epidemic of absence: a new way of understanding
allergies and autoimmune diseases. New York, NY: Scribner.


Walk, S. T., A. M. Blum, S. A.-S. Ewing, J. V. Weinstock, and V. B. Young. 2010.
Alteration of the murine gut microbiota during infection with the parasitic
helminth, Heligmosomoides polygyrus. Inflammatory bowel diseases 16 (11):1841–
1849.

Weintraub, L., and 15 October 2013. 2013. Coronado shares dive after failed trial
on Crohn’s disease treatment.BostonGlobe.com.
http://www.bostonglobe.com/business/2013/10/14/coronado-           shares-dive-
after-failed-trial-crohn-disease-
treatment/rAzJs6rS5WHkNL42kfcFyK/story.html (last accessed 16 December
2013).


Whatmore, S., and S. Hinchliffe. 2010. Ecological landscapes. In The Oxford
Handbook of Material Culture Studies, eds. M. C. Beaudry and D. Hicks. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.

Whitelocks, S. 2012. Parasitic worms offer hope of cure for multiple sclerosis.
Mail Online. http://www.dailymail.co.uk/health/article-2108228/Parasitic-
worms-offer-hope-cure-multiple-sclerosis.html (last accessed 16 December 2013).

Wolch, J. R., and J. Emel. 1998. Animal Geographies: Place, Politics, and Identity in
the Nature-culture Borderlands. Verso.

Woodward, K., J. P. Jones III, and S. A. Marston. 2010. Of eagles and flies:
orientations toward the site. Area42 (3):271–280.




                                        84
Woodward, K., and J. Lea. 2010. Geographies of Affect. In The SAGE handbook of
social geographies. Los Angeles; London: SAGE.

World Health Organization. 2010. Working to overcome the global impact of neglected
tropical diseases: first WHO report on neglected tropical diseases. Geneva: Department
of Reproductive health and Research, World HealthOrganization.

Youinou, P., J.-O. Pers, M. E. Gershwin, and Y. Shoenfeld. 2010. Geo -
epidemiology and autoimmunity. Journal of Autoimmunity 34 (3):J163–J167.


Zuk, M. 2014. Paleofantasy: What Evolution Really Tells Us about Sex, Diet, and How
We Live 1 edition. New York: W. W. Norton & Company.











































                                         85
                                       VITA


                              Sophia Anne Strosberg


Education


       MA in Geography, expected 2014
       Advisor: J. Anthony Stallins
       University of Kentucky, Lexington

       Graduate Certificate in Social Theory, 2013
       University of Kentucky, Lexington

       BA in History, 2003
       Minor: Comparative Religion

       magna cum laude
       University of Vermont, Burlington


Publications

       2014. Strosberg, S., Crane, A. and Murphy, M. Interview with Derek Gregory.
       disClosure: Mappings (22).



Awards and Honors

       University of Kentucky Graduate Assistantship. 2012-present.
       Phi Beta Kappa. 2003.
       Phi Alpha Theta. 2003.


Conference Activity and Participation

       Sessions Organized

             2014. Killer T-Cells to Global Biomics: A Critical Political Ecology of
             Health. Session. Dimensions of Political Ecology Conference on Nature
             and Society, Lexington, KY.

             2013. Mapping the Potential for a Landscape Political Ecology. Session.
             with Laura Sharp, Dimensions of Political Ecology Conference on
             Nature and Society, Lexington, KY, 2013.

       Papers Presented
             2014. Hookworm and Health: Contingency in the Multinaturalistic

             Human Body. Paper. Dimensions of Political Ecology Conference on



                                       86
              Nature and Society, Lexington, KY.

              2014. Industrious Biologies: The Rebellious Hookworm and the
              Infected Body. Paper. Association of American Geographers Annual
              Meeting in Tampa, FL.



Teaching Experience

       University of Kentucky, Teaching Assistant, Department of Geography
              Global Dynamics of Health and Disease. Fall 2013; Spring 2014.
              Cities of the World. Spring 2013.
              Global Environmental Issues. Fall 2012.


Departmental and University Service


       Geography Graduate Student Union
              Professional Development Committee representative. 2013-2014.
              Outreach Committee representative. 2012-2013.

       Political Ecology Working Group
              Dimensions of Political Ecology Conference
              Executive Committee (Secretary). 2013-2014.
              Speakers Subcommittee (Chair). 2013-2014.
              Field Trip Subcommittee (Co-Chair). 2012-2013.


       Critical Pedagogy Working Group
              Facilitator: Geography Department TA-Workshop

       disClosure: A Journal of Social Theory
              Editorial Collective





















                                       87