        JMIR SERIOUS GAMES                                                                                        Good et al


        Original Paper


        The Cure: Design and Evaluation of a Crowdsourcing Game for

        Gene Selection for Breast Cancer Survival Prediction




        Benjamin M Good , PhD; Salvatore Loguercio , PhD; Obi L Griffith , PhD; Max Nanis , BS; Chunlei Wu , PhD;   1
                     1
        Andrew I Su , PhD
        1
        2The Scripps Research Institute, Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, La Jolla, CA, United States
         Washington University School of Medicine, Department of Medicine, St Louis, MO, United States

        Corresponding Author:
        Benjamin M Good, PhD
        The Scripps Research Institute
        Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine

        MEM-216
        10550 North Torrey Pines Road
        La Jolla, CA, 92037
        United States
        Phone: 1 619 261 2046
        Fax: 1 (858) 784 2345

        Email: bgood@scripps.edu


        Abstract

        Background: Molecular signatures for predicting breast cancer prognosis could greatly improve care through personalization
        of treatment. Computational analyses of genome-wide expression datasets have identified such signatures, but these signatures

        leave much to be desired in terms of accuracy, reproducibility, and biological interpretability. Methods that take advantage of
        structured prior knowledge (eg, protein interaction networks) show promise in helping to define better signatures, but most
        knowledgeremainsunstructured.Crowdsourcingviascientificdiscoverygamesisanemergingmethodologythathasthepotential
        to tap into human intelligence at scales and in modes unheard of before.

        Objective: The main objective of this study was to test the hypothesis that knowledge linking expression patterns of specific
        genestobreastcanceroutcomescouldbecapturedfromplayersofanopen,Web-basedgame.Weenvisionedcapturingknowledge
        both from the player’s prior experience and from their ability to interpret text related to candidate genes presented to them in the
        context of the game.

        Methods: We developed and evaluated an online game called The Cure that captured information from players regarding genes
        for use as predictors of breast cancer survival. Information gathered from game play was aggregated using a voting approach,
        and used to create rankings of genes. The top genes from these rankings were evaluated using annotation enrichment analysis,
        comparison to prior predictor gene sets, and by using them to train and test machine learning systems for predicting 10 year
        survival.

        Results: Between its launch in September 2012 and September 2013, The Cure attracted more than 1000 registered players,
        who collectively played nearly 10,000 games. Gene sets assembled through aggregation of the collected data showed significant
        enrichment for genes known to be related to key concepts such as cancer, disease progression, and recurrence. In terms of the
        predictive accuracy of models trained using this information, these gene sets provided comparable performance to gene sets

        generated using other methods, including those used in commercial tests. The Cure is available on the Internet.
        Conclusions: The principal contribution of this work is to show that crowdsourcing games can be developed as a means to
        address problems involving domain knowledge. While most prior work on scientific discovery games and crowdsourcing in
        generaltakesasapremisethatcontributorshavelittleornoexpertise,herewedemonstratedacrowdsourcingsystemthatsucceeded

        in capturing expert knowledge.

        (JMIR Serious Games 2014;2(2):e7)   doi:10.2196/games.3350





        http://games.jmir.org/2014/2/e7/                                                   JMIR Serious Games 2014 | vol. 2 | iss. 2 | e7 | p.1
                                                                                                  (page number not for citation purposes)
XSL  •FO
RenderX
         JMIR SERIOUS GAMES                                                                                           Good et al


         KEYWORDS
         breast neoplasms; gene expression; artificial intelligence; survival analysis; crowdsourcing; Web applications; computer games;
         collaborative and social computing systems and tools; supervised learning; feature selection

                                                                      selecting gene sets for survival prediction. Here, we explore a
         Introduction
                                                                      crowdsourcing approach for tapping into that knowledge.
         Molecular Predictors for Breast Cancer                       Crowdsourcing

         Breast cancer is the most common form of cancer in women     Crowdsourcing processes take tasks traditionally performed by
         [1]. It has been studied extensively with genomic technologieindividualsorsmallgroupsandreformulatethemsuchthatlarge
         with many attempts to devise molecular predictors of clinicalnumbers of people can participate in their completion. There
         outcomes[2-4]anddrugresponse[5].Ifsuccessful,testsderived    are many instantiations of the crowdsourcing paradigm [15],
         from these predictors would pave the way toward personalized
                                                                      here we focus on just one, games with a purpose (GWAP) [16].
         therapy and better care. While much progress has been made,  GWAPsincentivizelargescaleworkbytranslatingtherequired
         including several commercially available tests [6], molecularlabor into elements of games. The games are played for fun, for
         predictors consistently show lower than desirable accuracy,  learning,andtoaidinachievingtheunderlyingpurpose.Popular
         degradeinperformanceinsubsequentvalidationstudies,identify   GWAPs within biology include Foldit for protein folding [17],
         different gene sets in every permutation, and often have no
         discernable biological rationale [7].                        Phylo for multiple sequence alignment [18], and MalariaSpot
                                                                      forimageanalysis[19].HereweintroduceaGWAPforgenomic
         Here, we address the challenge of predicting survival based oneature selection called The Cure.
         gene expression and copy number variation. Given a database
                                                                      Our high-level objective is to identify genes that can be used
         of these genomic measurements and associated clinical        to build improved prognostic predictors for breast cancer. Our
         outcomes, the objective is to produce a classifier that will hypothesis is that, if aggregated effectively, the collective
         accurately separate the patients into two classes, those thatknowledge,reading,andreasoningabilityofalargecommunity
         survive beyond ten years from initial diagnosis, and those thcouldhelptoidentifygenesthatareusefulinconstructingrobust
         do not. Any such attempt at class prediction based on        classifiers, but might be hidden from purely data driven
         high-throughput(eg,microarray)dataistechnicallychallenging
                                                                      approaches. In striving to achieve that aim, we conducted the
         because of the very large number of potential features [8].  study described here to assess the feasibility of the use of an
         Typical datasets provide measurements for tens of thousands  open, online game (The Cure) in capturing pertinent,
         of genes, and each gene is a potential predictive feature forexpert-level biomedical knowledge.
         in a classifier. The individual members of optimal feature sets
         work synergistically, displaying relationships that make the The central questions addressed are: (1) How many people, of
         groupmoreusefulforpredictionasawholethananyindividual        what levels of expertise, would play a game oriented around
                                                                      gene selection for breast cancer survival prediction and why?
         unit. The space of possible feature combinations is too large(2) Would it be possible to extract a gene ranking from the
         explore exhaustively and, even if it were, the tests available for
         evaluating feature set quality are not precise. As a result, results of play that reflected biomedical knowledge? That is,
         researchers rely on heuristics and, increasingly, on prior   could the game act as a portal for expert-level knowledge
         knowledge to identify good feature groups.                   transfer? And (3) could the gene ranking captured through the
                                                                      game be used to generate classifiers that perform well in
         Recent gene selection methods are driven by structured prior cross-dataset evaluations?
         knowledgeinformssuchasprotein-proteininteractionnetworks
         [9,10], pathway databases [11,12], and information gathered  The null hypotheses are that: (1) no one would play, (2) the
                                                                      results of their play would not yield discernible biological
         from pan-cancer datasets [13]. These methods guide the searchknowledge, and (3) any gene ranking produced would be no
         for predictive gene sets toward cohesive groups related to eabetter than random. Below we discuss the design of the game,
         other, and to the predicted phenotype through biological
         mechanism.Indoingso,theyhaveimprovedthestabilityofthe        and then present results from one year of open play that shed
         gene selection process and the biological relevance of the   light on each of the questions posed above.
         identified signatures. These techniques hint at the potential of
                                                                      Methods
         strategies that marry a top-down approach based on established
         knowledge with a bottom-up approach based directly on        Game Design
         experimental data, but they have not yet produced substantially
         greateraccuracythanotherapproaches.Thismaybedueinpart        The Cure is a Web application consisting of the pages home,
         to a scarcity of relevant structured knowledge with which to login,boardselection,game,andhelp.Thehomepageprovides
         compute.                                                     information about the project and the game, and allows users
                                                                      toeitherloginorcreateaccounts.Usersmustcreateanaccount
         Since the year 2000, more than 166,000 publications related to
         breast cancer have been added to PubMed [14]. Within that    to play. During account creation, users must select a username
         body of literature, and in the minds of those that have createdd password, and have the option of entering an email address
                                                                      and answering three short survey questions: (1) “Most recent
         and consumed it, lays a wealth of knowledge relevant to      academic   degree?”,  (2)  “Do    you   consider  yourself


         http://games.jmir.org/2014/2/e7/                                                      JMIR Serious Games 2014 | vol. 2 | iss. 2 | e7 | p.2
                                                                                                      (page number not for citation purposes)
XSL  •FO
RenderX
        JMIR SERIOUS GAMES                                                                                          Good et al


        knowledgeable about cancer biology?”, and (3) “Do you        Game
        consider yourself a biologist?”.                             After training, the player is presented with boards containing

        Training                                                     25 different genes (Figure 1 shows an example board). The
        When players first register, they are presented with a trainingjective of each game is to choose a set of 5 genes that
                                                                     produces a better decision tree classifier than that of the
        stage that must be passed before they enter the main game areautomated opponent “Barney”. The players, the human player
        The training stage consists of four “boards” containing 2 to and Barney, alternate turns, taking a gene card from the board
        features common to animals such as “number of legs, breathes
        air, produces milk, etc”. To complete the level, the player mustplacingitintheirhand,withthehumanplayeralwaysgoing
        selectthefeaturesthatcanbestbeusedtodiscriminatebetween      first. Once a card is taken from the board, it cannot be put back,
        mammals and other classes of animal, before the games        andtheotherplayercannottakeit.Thescoreforthefinal5card
                                                                     hand determines the winner of the game. Note that each time a
        automated opponent “Barney” beats them to it. This task was  board is rendered, the locations of the genes are randomized to
        chosen as a way to introduce the dynamics of the game, and toprevent bias.
        get across the idea of feature selection for classification on a
        straightforward problem.

        Figure 1. The Cure game. The figure shows a game in progress in which both players have completed 2 of the 5 turns. Players alternate turns, taking
        a gene card from the board and adding it to their hand. The player with the highest score after 5 turns is the winner. The tabbed display provides gene
        annotations ("Ontology", "Rifs") and views of decision trees constructed by the system using the selected genes. The scores reflect the predictive power
        of the selected genes. The system produces these scores by using data associated with the selected genes to train and test a decision tree classifier. The
        scores are the accuracy of these inferred classifiers.




































        Gene Annotations                                             tabs). All of the annotations contain hyperlinks that the players
                                                                     can follow for more information. A search interface allows the
        Dragging the mouse over each gene provides the player with   player to find genes on the board based on the text in their
        informationincluding:(1)asummarydescriptionfromUnigene,      related annotations. Coupled with the player’s biological
        (2) Gene Ontology annotations, and (3) snippets of text relatknowledge, this information helps the player make informed
        to the gene from The United States National Center for
                                                                     guessesaboutwhichgenesfromtheboardmightmakethemost
        Biotechnology Information’s Gene Rifs (Figure 2 shows these  useful predictors.




        http://games.jmir.org/2014/2/e7/                                                     JMIR Serious Games 2014 | vol. 2 | iss. 2 | e7 | p.3
                                                                                                    (page number not for citation purposes)
XSL  •FO
RenderX
        JMIR SERIOUS GAMES                                                                                           Good et al


        Figure 2. The Gene Rifs tab showing information about the Dicer gene. Gene Rifs provide textual descriptions of gene function extracted from abstracts.
        These can be used to gain insights into the possible connections between the gene and breast cancer prognosis, and thus can help players to intelligently
        select genes in the game.


































                                                                     displayedontheboardselectionpagealongwithitsglobalrank
        Scoring                                                      and the current top 10 scores.
        Each time a card is added to a player’s hand, the game server
                                                                     Board Selection
        scores the hand by evaluating the combined predictive
        performance of the genes it contains. To accomplish this     EachroundofTheCureconsistsofacollectionof100different
        evaluation,theserverusesageneexpressiondatasetcontaining     boards for players to choose from (Figure 3 shows this
        samples classified with long-term (>10 year) survival status.selection). Each board is composed of a different set of 25
        each evaluation, the server uses data from just the genes in semirandomly selected genes (see Multimedia Appendix 1 for
        player’s hand to train and test a decision tree classifier. Tboardcompositionstrategies).Theboardsarearrangedinloose

        scoreforthehandistheaccuracyreturnedbyacross-validation      order of difficulty, with the easiest boards occupying the lower
        experiment. In machine learning parlance, this is known as a numbers. The difficulty is assessed based on an estimation of
        “wrapper” feature set evaluation scheme [20]. A simplified   the predictive power of the complete 25 gene set, the more
        decisiontreecreatedusingalloftheavailabletraininginstances,  predictive, the easier the board. The goal of the board selection
        but just the selected genes, is displayed for the player and pageistocapturebothbroadanddeepcoverageofalltheboards

        opponent (Figure 1 and Multimedia Appendix 1 for additional  (and their corresponding gene sets) by the player community.
        details on the implementation of the scoring process). If theOnce a given board has been completed by at least 11 players,
        player loses, they are not awarded any points; they may play it is closed off so that players are forced to select a different
        the board again or select a different board to play. If they board. Any open board can be selected for play. Once a player
        theirscoreisdeterminedbasedontheaccuracyoftheirwinning       has completed a particular board, they are not allowed to play

        tree.Withineachround,playerscoresarecumulative.Themore       it again.
        games they win, the higher their score. The player’s score is









        http://games.jmir.org/2014/2/e7/                                                      JMIR Serious Games 2014 | vol. 2 | iss. 2 | e7 | p.4
                                                                                                     (page number not for citation purposes)
XSL  •FO
RenderX
        JMIR SERIOUS GAMES                                                                                          Good et al


        Figure3.Theboardselectionview.Starsindicateboardstheactiveplayerhascompleted,circlesindicateboardsthathavebeencompletedbyasufficient
        number of different players, and numbers indicate open boards. The pink progress bar indicates how close the community is to finishing the board.
































                                                                     We then empirically calculated a one-tailed P value for each
        Purpose                                                      value of F given O through simulations of random game play.
        The purpose of The Cure is to translate the knowledge of the The P values indicate the chances of observing a value of S or
        players, along with their ability to process textual information,
                                                                     greatergivenO,assumingthatallgeneselectionswererandom.
        into a ranked list of genes for use in the development of    Importantly, they allow for comparisons between genes with
        predictorsforbreastcancerprognosis.Thistranslationisenacted  different numbers of occurrences. For example, the known
        when the players select genes in the game. We record the geneapoptosis regulator BCL2 gene occurred in 13 played games
        selections, and apply aggregation functions to produce gene  (O=13), and was selected in 10 of those games (S=10), thus F
        rankings that reflect the consensus of the player community. for BCL2 was 0.77 with P<.001. Our simulations stopped at

        Aggregation Function for Gene Ranking                        10,000 iterations per value of O, hence P values below .0001
                                                                     cannotbereported.Ontheotherendofthespectrum,theAARD
        Each time a player selects a gene in a game, they are indicatgene (of unknown function) appeared in 33 played games
        to the system their intuition of that gene’s relevance for   (O=33), was selected 3 times (S=3), had an F of 0.09 with
        predicting breast cancer survival. That intuition may be baseP=.91. Given any collection of played games, we generate gene
        on their knowledge, on inferences drawn from gene annotation rankings based on the estimated P values for each value of F.
        information, or solely on random speculation. By aggregating
        the data collected from many different players across many   We can thus assemble gene sets based on different groups of
                                                                     games as well as different P value cutoffs.
        different games, we tried to eliminate the noise from random
        clicking and reveal the community consensus with regard to   Gene Set Assessments
        predictive genes.
                                                                     Quality
        Given a set of recorded games, our gene ranking method is as Given the gene sets produced by this system, we assess quality
        follows.Foreachgeneg,weestimatethefrequencyofselection       by: (1) direct comparison to gene sets used in published
        F(g) as,                                                     predictors of breast cancer survival, (2) gene set enrichment

        F(g)=(S(g))/(O(g))                                           analysis, and (3) classifier accuracy.
                                                                     Enrichment Analysis
        O(g)equalsthenumberoftimesthegenegappearedinaplayed
        game. Some genes appear on multiple boards, multiple players Enrichment analysis is a widely used statistical technique for
        play all boards, and all occurrences are counted. S(g) is theassessing the functional roles of gene sets based on their
        number of times the gene was selected by the human player.   annotations.GivenasetofgeneswithannotationssuchasGene


        http://games.jmir.org/2014/2/e7/                                                     JMIR Serious Games 2014 | vol. 2 | iss. 2 | e7 | p.5
                                                                                                    (page number not for citation purposes)
XSL  •FO
RenderX
         JMIR SERIOUS GAMES                                                                                           Good et al


         OntologyorDiseaseOntologyassociations,thesetestsestimate     Players and Games Played
         the annotation terms that are overrepresented in the gene setBased on the self-reported data collected during registration,
         Forexample,atypicalhigh-throughputexperimentmayidentify      the player population was mixed in terms of education,
         a set of 100 or more active genes in a given condition. An
         enrichment analysis can be used to detect if genes related to aientation as a biologist, and declared knowledge of cancer.
                                                                      Intotal,35.00%(377/1077)oftheplayershadagraduatedegree,
         functional category, such as the immune response or a disease28.88% (311/1077) had an undergraduate degree, and 36.12%
         group such as cancer, are represented in that set of 100 gene(389/1077) did not declare any degree. There were 31.94%
         more than they would be expected to by chance. By applying   (344/1077)oftheplayersthatconsideredthemselvesbiologists,
         enrichment analysis to the gene sets produced by The Cure    while 62.67% (675/1077) did not, with 5.39% (58/1077) not
         player community, we can identify whether genes annotated
         with terms related to breast cancer or other related diseases orponding. There were 32.96% (355/1077) of the players that
                                                                      declared that they were knowledgeable about cancer biology,
         processes are being preferentially selected, as we would expe60.35% (650/1077) did not, and 6.69% (72/1077) declined to
         if the players are not choosing randomly. In principle, it corespond.
         also unearth interesting new categories of genes selected by the
         player community.                                            Over the course of the year, the number and demographics of
                                                                      players registering per month fluctuated (Figure 4 shows this
         Classifier Accuracy                                          fluctuation). In the first two months, 36.4% (67/184) and 37%
         Finally, we measure the value of the gene sets by using them (13/35) of the players who registered had PhDs. After those

         to construct machine-learning-based classifiers that predict months, the percentage for the next four months ranged from
         year survival. Given a particular dataset, we eliminate      16% (4/25) to 18% (15/80), and then fluctuated between
         measurements from all genes outside of the set in question, aapproximately5%and10%thereafter.Weobservedtwonotable
         use the remaining measurements to train and test a predictivespikesinplayerregistrations.Thefirstcoincidedwiththelaunch
         model. For the experiments conducted here, we trained supportof the game, its presentation at Genome Informatics 2012, and
         vector machine (SVM) classifiers on gene expression derived  its advertisement as part of the Sage Bionetworks DREAM7

         datasets, and tested them on independent test sets. We comparbreastcancerprognosischallenge.Thesecond,inMayof2013,
         the accuracy of the predictors produced using gene sets derivis likely related to a posting on the popular website i09, which
         from the game and gene sets used in published survival       occurred on May 1, 2013 [21].
         predictors.
                                                                      The total number of games played roughly followed the trends
         Results                                                      observed for new player registrations. The most games played
                                                                      on a single day were 550, on May 2, immediately after the i09
                                                                      posting.
         Data From One Year of Game Play
         The results presented here are derived from games played     The number of games played per player followed a power law,
         between September 7, 2012 and September 5, 2013. In that     consistent with most studies of the quantity of voluntary
         time, 1077 player accounts were created and a total of 15,669contributions  in  open   environments    (eg,  Wikipedia
                                                                      contributions) [22]. There were 243 players that played more
         gameswereplayed(includingtraininggames).Therewere9904
         games that were played on the cancer datasets. All collected than 10 games, 28 players that played more than 100 games,
         data except personal player information is available, see    andthemostprolificplayer(“oneoff64”)thatplayed718games
         Multimedia Appendix 2.                                       (Figure 5 shows these numbers).

























         http://games.jmir.org/2014/2/e7/                                                      JMIR Serious Games 2014 | vol. 2 | iss. 2 | e7 | p.6
                                                                                                      (page number not for citation purposes)
XSL  •FO
RenderX
       JMIR SERIOUS GAMES                                                                        Good et al

       Figure 4. New player registrations per month, with academic degree. The figure shows the fluctuations in both the size and the demographics of the
       player population over time.































       Figure 5. Games played per player. The majority of players only played a few games, while some players played several hundred games.


































       http://games.jmir.org/2014/2/e7/                                       JMIR Serious Games 2014 | vol. 2 | iss. 2 | e7 | p.7
                                                                                   (page number not for citation purposes)
XSL •FO
RenderX
         JMIR SERIOUS GAMES                                                                                             Good et al

         Gene Set Evaluations                                          reflect only the player’s thoughts about the best genes for that
                                                                       board prior to seeing the results of the decision tree analysis.
         We evaluated three game collections: (1) “all”, (2) “expert”,
         and(3)“inexperienced”.“All”considersgamesfromallplayers;      For all the results reported here, we select genes with P≤.001
         “expert” includes games from players that indicated that they (see Aggregation Function in the Methods section). At that
         had either a PhD or an MD and knowledge of cancer; and
                                                                       threshold, we observed 61 genes in the “all” group, 85 in the
         “inexperienced” includes just the games played by people      “expert” group, and 13 in the “inexperienced” group (Table 1).
         without an advanced degree, with no knowledge of cancer, and  The complete set of game-derived gene rankings is available in
         that were not biologists. Only the first five cards per playerMultimedia Appendix 3.
         board are used for the analysis. This reduces the chances that
                                                                       There was one gene, CASP1, which appeared in all three sets.
         individual players who repeatedly play the same board, either The “all” gene set included 35 genes that also appeared in the
         through cheating or by repeatedly losing to Barney, can
         introducebiasbasedonoverfittingthatboard.Eachgameshould       “expert” set, as well as 4 genes from the “inexperienced” set
                                                                       (Figure 6 shows these sets). Aside from CASP1, there was no
                                                                       overlap between the “expert” and “inexperienced” gene sets.

         Table 1. Predictor gene sets derived from The Cure.
          Player group                  n genes                         Games considered               Contributing players

                                        P≤.001
          All                           61                              4314                           477

          Expert                        85                              1106                           52

          Inexperienced                 13                              1643                           231


         Figure 6. Overlap of game-derived gene sets.





























                                                                       any diseases (Table 2). The background genes used for the
         Enrichment Analysis of Gene Sets                              enrichment analysis statistics corresponded to the 3731 genes
         Given the gene sets identified above, the next question is    that appeared in at least one game. The disease term with the
         whetherornottheyarerelevanttobreastcancer.Hasknowledge
                                                                       mostsignificantcorrectedPvalueinboththe“all”and“expert”
         successfully been transferred from the player population into gene sets was “cancer or viral infections”. All of the top ten
         thegame?Toaddressthisquestion,wefirstusedtheWebGestalt        disease terms for both gene sets correspond to various kinds of
         enrichmentanalysistooltoidentifywhichdiseaserelatedterms      cancer or cancer processes, such as “recurrence” and “disease
         werestatisticallyoverrepresentedintheannotationsofthegenes    progression”. Though they do not appear in the top ten results,
         [23]. We found both the “expert” gene set and the “all” gene
                                                                       “Breast neoplasms” and “Carcinoma, Ductal, Breast” are
         sets to be significantly enriched for cancer-related diseases,significantly represented in both gene sets (P < e-05).
         whilethe“inexperienced”setwasnotsignificantlyenrichedfor


         http://games.jmir.org/2014/2/e7/                                                        JMIR Se(page number not for citation purposes) | p.8

XSL  •FO
RenderX
         JMIR SERIOUS GAMES                                                                                                     Good et al


         Table 2. The top ten disease terms for the “expert” gene set based on WebGestalt analysis. All reported disease terms had adjusted P values using the
         Benjamini & Hochberg correction for multiple testing <.001. All of these terms were also significantly enriched in the “all” gene set with P<.001 except
         “Intestinal neoplasms“ which had a corrected P value of .01 in that set.

          Disease term                                     Expert players (85 genes)              All (61 genes)

                                                           Genes in set   Adjusted                Genes in set   Adjusted
                                                                                    a                                      a
                                                                          P value (BH )                          P value (BH )

          Cancer or viral infections                       37             5.5e-16                 25             8.1e-10
          Neoplasms                                        32             4.7e-13                 22             1.6e-08

          Urogenital neoplasms                             23             2.7e-11                 12             9.0e-05

          Cell transformation, neoplastic                  16             4.7e-11                 13             3.0e-09

          Stomach neoplasms                                14             2.6e-08                 8              2.0e-04

          Disease progression                              16             3.7e-08                 13             2.5e-07

          Neoplastic processes                             20             5.1e-08                 18             1.3e-08
          Recurrence                                       14             5.1e-08                 11             1.1e-06

          Intestinal neoplasms                             15             6.1e-08                 6              .01

          Necrosis                                         15             1.1e-07                 13             1.8e-07

         a
          BH = Benjamini & Hochberg correction for multiple testing

         Comparison to Established Predictor Gene Sets                      the 94 genes recently identified via the Attractor Metagenes
                                                                            approach [8]. Genes in the “gold standard” sets that never
         Inadditiontothediseaseenrichmentanalysis,wemeasuredthe             appeared in a played game were removed from the comparison

         overlapbetweenthegame-derivedgenesetsand“goldstandard”             (eg, only 58 of the 70 genes in the MammaPrint set were used.)
         predictor gene sets used in commercial prognostic tests, and       The “expert” gene set contained four of the OncoType genes,
         from recent publications. Figure 7 shows the overlaps between
                                                                            zero of the MammaPrint genes, three of the RFRS genes, and
         theexpertgamegeneset,the21genesusedintheOncoTypeDx                 two of the Attractor Metagenes. Based on a Fisher’s exact test,
         test[24],the70genesintheMammaPrinttest[2],the100genes              there was a statistically significant overlap with only the
         recentlyidentifiedviaRandomForestanalysis(RFRS)[4],and
                                                                            OncoType genes (P=2.026e-4).







































         http://games.jmir.org/2014/2/e7/                                                              JMIR Serious Games 2014 | vol. 2 | iss. 2 | e7 | p.9
                                                                                                              (page number not for citation purposes)
     •
XSL    FO
RenderX
        JMIR SERIOUS GAMES                                                                                           Good et al


        Figure 7. Overlap of "expert" gene set derived from game data (in green) with prior published predictor gene sets. RFRS: Random Forest Relapse
        Score.































        Classifier Evaluations                                       selected in a literature review [26]. In fact, the “expert” gene
                                                                     set from The Cure had the highest accuracy on the Griffith test
        The gene set comparisons and enrichment analyses described   set, and the third highest accuracy on the Oslo test set. In
        above show clearly that the gene sets generated from the gamecontrast, the 13 genes selected by the “inexperienced” players
        data are nonrandom, with a significant representation of geneproducedtheworstclassifierfortheOslotestset,andthesecond
        that are related to cancer. The final question addressed here is
                                                                     worst for the Griffith test set.
        how well the game-derived gene sets do when used to create   Based on these experiments, and others employing different
        classifiers for predicting breast cancer survival.           machine learning methods (data not reported), we could not
        Weconductedtwoexperiments,eachinvolvingthedevelopment
                                                                     establish a statistically significant difference between the
        of machine learning models for predicting 10 year survival   performance of models trained using the game-derived gene
        based only on gene expression information. In the first, we  setsversusmodelstrainedwithgenesetsfrommoreestablished
        trained an SVM classifier using gene expression data from themethodologies.Whilewecouldnotprovethatthegame-derived
        Metabricdataset[25],andtesteditontheOslovalidationdataset    “expert” gene set was better than the other gene sets in a
        generated for the Sage Dream7 breast cancer challenge [3]. Instatistically significant manner, none of the other gene
        thesecond,weusedthedatasetfrom[4],usingthesamedivision
                                                                     sets—including those used in commercial tests—were found
        of training/test data described in that publication. In both to be consistently better either. The lack of a clear “winner” in
        we varied only the gene sets provided to the classifiers, andthis analysis reinforces the concept that there are actually many
        measured the performance of each gene set based on the       different gene sets whose expression signatures are nearly
        accuracy of the SVM on the samples in the corresponding test equallypredictiveofabreastcancerprognosis[27].Identifying
        set. Figure 8 shows that both the “expert” and “all” gene sets
                                                                     the optimal combination of genes, clinical features (eg, age,
        from the game performed comparably to the OncoType,          lymph node status), and machine learning approach remains a
        MammaPrint, RFRS, Attractor MetaGenes, and to gene sets      future challenge.











        http://games.jmir.org/2014/2/e7/                                                     JMIR Serious Games 2014 | vol. 2 | iss. 2 | e7 | p.10
                                                                                                     (page number not for citation purposes)
XSL  •FO
RenderX
        JMIR SERIOUS GAMES                                                                                           Good et al


        Figure 8. Evaluation of accuracy of models trained to predict ten year survival using gene sets derived from the game, and prior gene sets from the
        breast cancer literature. Lauss, Literature survey [27]. Vant’Veer datasets [3]. RFRS: Random Forest Relapse Score.




































        Player Survey                                                through which they could try to help. In some cases, this
                                                                     motivation is likely very personal, 63.6% (75/118) of
        The Cure managed to attract and engage a surprisingly large  respondents indicated that they know or have known someone
        number of people. To ascertain more about the player         that has or has had breast cancer.
        population, we conducted a survey of registered players as of
        November 2013. We sent an email to the 1162 players who had  Looking at the player demographics, we found that 59.0%
                                                                     (69/117) of the respondents were male, and 41.0% (48/117)
        entered an email address when they registered, inviting them female with 2 not responding. The largest age brackets were
        to answer questions about themselves, their motivations for
        playing, and their experience with the game. We received     21-29 years old (34.5%, 41/119) and 30-39 years old (28.6%,
        responsesfrom119participants.Whiletherespondentsrepresent    34/119) (Figure 9 shows the ages).
        only about 10.24% (119/1162) of the total player population
        (andlikelyamoremotivatedsegment),theresponsesdoprovide       Expandingontheexpertiseinformationcollectedwhenplayers
                                                                     registered, we asked the players to categorize their knowledge
        some interesting insights.                                   of breast cancer. The most popular answer by a wide margin
        The first and perhaps most telling question in the survey was,as the middle expertise level, “I know some biology and have
                                                                     some understanding of what cancer is” at 57.1% (68/119) with
        “Why did you sign up for The Cure?”. Overall, 71.4% (85/119) numbers decreasing toward the high and low expertise levels
        indicatedthattheyplayedtohelpbreastcancerresearch,52.9%
        (63/119) played to learn something, and just 43.7 (52/119)   (Figure 10 shows these answers).
        played in order to have fun. Respondents could select multiplFinally,weaskedplayerswhetherthegamewasfunandwhether
        answers. Given the design of The Cure website (“Play Games,  or not they learned anything. Most (66.4%, 79/119) found the
        Cure Cancer!”) [28], as well as the way it was promoted, it is
                                                                     game to be “A little bit entertaining”, 14.3% (17/119) found it
        surprising to see that the game aspect was actually the leastto be “very fun”, and 19.3% (23/119) found it “not at all” fun.
        motivational of the three. While we feel that developing thisTheresultsforlearningaresimilar,with62.2%(74/119)feeling
        system as a game had a strong positive effect on recruitment that they “learned a little bit”, 9.2% (11/119) that they “learned
        and engagement, it is clear that there is a large pool of peoa lot”, and 28.6% (34/119) that they “did not learn thing”.
        thatarehighlymotivatedtocontributetobreastcancerresearch
        in any way they can. The game was simply one more vehicle


        http://games.jmir.org/2014/2/e7/                                                     JMIR Serious Games 2014 | vol. 2 | iss. 2 | e7 | p.11
                                                                                                     (page number not for citation purposes)
XSL  •FO
RenderX
        JMIR SERIOUS GAMES                                                                                     Good et al


        In summary, the survey showed that The Cure reached a     and educational, and that the dominant motivation for playing
        demographically diverse audience containing both experts awas to help breast cancer research.
        novices, that most players found the game mildly entertaining
        Figure 9. Ages of players.























        Figure 10. Levels of breast cancer knowledge among players.




























                                                                  knowledge, and (3) translating the captured knowledge to
        Discussion                                                advance a research objective. We now briefly explore each of

        Principal Results                                         these in turn.
                                                                  While previous work on scientific discovery games such as
        The principal contribution of this work is as an exemplar Foldit have focused on visual problems that do not require any
        show that crowdsourcing games can be developed as a means
        to address problems that require expert-level knowledge. Tonowledge on the part of the participants, the task presented in
        our knowledge, this is the first serious game of this kind. In the was knowledge intensive. In order to successfully
        introduction, we laid out three foundational question areasarticipate, players either had to bring significant prior
        pertaining to: (1) recruiting participants, (2) capturing experience or be willing to invest a substantial amount of time

        http://games.jmir.org/2014/2/e7/                                                 JMIR Serious Games 2014 | vol. 2 | iss. 2 | e7 | p.12
                                                                                                (page number not for citation purposes)
XSL  •FO
RenderX
         JMIR SERIOUS GAMES                                                                                            Good et al


         learning. Given the challenging nature of the task, and the  backedbyliterallydecadesofresearchprovidesstrongevidence
         importance of prior knowledge, the results from the first yeathat this approach is worthy of additional study.
         of the game were quite positive in terms of recruitment (1000+
         players) and engagement (nearly 10,000 games). Based on the  Limitations
         data collected when players registered, and through the survey,e game described here was an early stage prototype with
                                                                      many limitations in terms of both its ability to achieve its
         the game clearly succeeded in capturing the attention of a
         diverse audience including both novices and experts. While   purpose, and its ability to entertain players. Chief among the
         motivations were mixed, the dominant theme appeared to be a  former was that the prebuilt boards severely constrained the
         strong desire to help advance breast cancer research.        number of different feature combinations that players could
                                                                      explore. The vast majority of possible gene sets simply could
         The second question was whether or not knowledge could be    never be examined within this game framework. Further,
         captured from players. The gene rankings produced from both  becausetheaggregationfunctionrankedindividualgenesrather
         the entire set of games played (the “all” set) and the games
         playedbythe“expert”playersclearlydemonstratethatadvanced     thangenesets,itisunlikelythatitwouldidentifyoptimalfeature
         biomedical knowledge was transferred from the community      combinations.Infutureiterations,itwouldbebeneficialtoadapt
                                                                      the game to allow advanced players more freedom to explore
         through the game (Table 2). The game succeeded in capturing  the feature space, while still maintaining the competitive
         knowledge from players with prior experience, but it did not dynamics that made the game entertaining.
         appeartosuccessfullyharnessthereadingandreasoningability
         of the nonexperts. This was apparent in the poor performance Finally, the game could be made much more fun overall. The
         ofthegenesextractedfromthe“inexperienced”players(Figure      currentformulationwashighlyrepetitive,andhadanextremely
                                                                      steeplearningcurve.Thetransitionfromthebrieftrainingstage
         8).                                                          to the real games was abrupt, and left many players confused.
         The final question was whether or not the collected knowledge
         could be used to advance the state of the art in breast cancern the future, both the fun factor and the learning aspects of the
                                                                      game could be improved by implementing different levels of
         survival prediction. While we demonstrated that the gene setsdifficulty, providing more educational information in the early
         selected by the aggregated actions of the player community   stages, and diversifying the tasks presented to players. Such
         were both relevant and competitive with gene sets produced   changesshouldimprovebothplayerengagementandthequality
         using other means, we did not conclusively generate a better
         predictor of breast cancer prognosis (Figure 8). There is no of the information captured by the system. The code for The
         doubt that the case for applying serious games in the context ofe game is open source, and we would warmly welcome any
                                                                      contributions or adaptations [29].
         knowledge-intensive challenges would have been strengthened
         by a better result here. However, it is important to keep in mindlusions
         thatthisisanextremelydifficult,wellstudiedproblemthatmay     There is a large, heterogeneous population of people on the
         not even have an optimal solution [27]. The fact that the genInternet that actively seek ways to use their minds to help solve
         setsderivedfromthegamearecomparableintermsofpredictive
         accuracy to gene sets identified using statistical approachesimportant problems. Games such as The Cure provide one
                                                                      avenuetotapintothishiddenresourceforbiomedicaldiscovery.
          

         Acknowledgments

         WewouldliketothankallofthepeoplewhoplayedTheCure.ResearchreportedinthispublicationwassupportedbytheNational
         InstituteofGeneralMedicalSciencesoftheNationalInstitutesofHealthunderawardnumbersR01GM089820andR01GM083924,
         and by the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences of the National Institute of Health under award number
         UL1TR001114. BMG and ASU conceived of the study. BMG and MN implemented the game. BMG drafted the manuscript. SL

         and CW contributed to the preprocessing of the microarray datasets. OLG provided advanced access to the microarray dataset
         used in the second two rounds of the game, and provided feedback on the game interface.


         Conflicts of Interest
         None declared.


         Multimedia Appendix 1
         Additionaldetailonmethods.Atextdocumentcontainingadditionalinformationaboutthemethodsusedtoprocessthemicroarray
         datasets, select genes for boards, and execute the machine learning experiments.

         [PDF File (Adobe PDF File), 328KB - games_v2i2e7_app1.pdf ]


         Multimedia Appendix 2
         Cure database export. The complete SQL database used to capture data for The Cure game. The database contains: (1) gene

         annotation information provided to the players in the game, (2) gene sets used to compose the boards in the game, (3) genes

         http://games.jmir.org/2014/2/e7/                                                      JMIR Serious Games 2014 | vol. 2 | iss. 2 | e7 | p.13
                                                                                                      (page number not for citation purposes)
XSL  •FO
RenderX
         JMIR SERIOUS GAMES                                                                                           Good et al


         (“cards”) selected by the players during their games including the order in which they were selected, (4) a log of games played,
         (5) logs of user actions including mouse click and hover events, and (6) player information (note that email and IP addresses have
         been removed). This is a compressed file that can be imported and opened using a MySQL database.

         [GZ File, 31MB - games_v2i2e7_app2.gz ]


         Multimedia Appendix 3
         Gene rankings from The Cure. An Excel workbook that shows the gene rankings generated from game play data. Rankings are
         shown for games from all players, from "experts" (those with a PhD or MD and knowledge of cancer), those with no expertise
         (no advanced degree, no knowledge of cancer, not a biologist), those with cancer knowledge, and those with a PhD or MD.

         Additional worksheets show the results from the WebGestalt analysis of the top ranked genes.
         [XLSX File (Microsoft Excel File), 772KB - games_v2i2e7_app3.xlsx ]


         References
         1.   Bray F, Ren JS, Masuyer E, Ferlay J. Global estimates of cancer prevalence for 27 sites in the adult population in 2008.
              Int J Cancer 2013 Mar 1;132(5):1133-1145. [doi: 10.1002/ijc.27711] [Medline: 22752881]

         2.   van'tVeerLJ,DaiH,vandeVijverMJ,HeYD,HartAA,MaoM,etal.Geneexpressionprofilingpredictsclinicaloutcome
              of breast cancer. Nature 2002 Jan 31;415(6871):530-536. [doi: 10.1038/415530a] [Medline: 11823860]
         3.   Margolin AA, Bilal E, Huang E, Norman TC, Ottestad L, Mecham BH, et al. Systematic analysis of challenge-driven
              improvements in molecular prognostic models for breast cancer. Sci Transl Med 2013 Apr 17;5(181):181re1 [FREE Full
              text] [doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3006112] [Medline: 23596205]
         4.   Griffith OL, Pepin F, Enache OM, Heiser LM, Collisson EA, Spellman PT, et al. A robust prognostic signature for

              hormone-positive node-negative breast cancer. Genome Med 2013;5(10):92 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1186/gm496]
              [Medline: 24112773]
         5.   DaemenA,GriffithOL,HeiserLM,WangNJ,EnacheOM,SanbornZ,etal.Modelingprecisiontreatmentofbreastcancer.
              Genome Biol 2013;14(10):R110 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1186/gb-2013-14-10-r110] [Medline: 24176112]
         6.   Ross JS, Hatzis C, Symmans WF, Pusztai L, Hortobágyi GN. Commercialized multigene predictors of clinical outcome
              forbreastcancer.Oncologist2008May;13(5):477-493[FREEFulltext][doi:10.1634/theoncologist.2007-0248][Medline:

              18515733]
         7.   Weigelt B, Pusztai L, Ashworth A, Reis-Filho JS. Challenges translating breast cancer gene signatures into the clinic. Nat
              Rev Clin Oncol 2012 Jan;9(1):58-64. [doi: 10.1038/nrclinonc.2011.125] [Medline: 21878891]
         8.   ChengWY,OuYangTH,AnastassiouD.Developmentofaprognosticmodelforbreastcancersurvivalinanopenchallenge
              environment.SciTranslMed2013Apr17;5(181):181ra50[FREEFulltext][doi:10.1126/scitranslmed.3005974][Medline:
              23596202]

         9.   Dutkowski J, Ideker T. Protein networks as logic functions in development and cancer. PLoS Comput Biol 2011
              Sep;7(9):e1002180 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002180] [Medline: 21980275]
         10.  Winter C, Kristiansen G, Kersting S, Roy J, Aust D, Knösel T, et al. Google goes cancer: Improving outcome prediction
              for cancer patients by network-based ranking of marker genes. PLoS Comput Biol 2012;8(5):e1002511 [FREE Full text]
              [doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002511] [Medline: 22615549]
         11.  Bild AH, Yao G, Chang JT, Wang Q, Potti A, Chasse D, et al. Oncogenic pathway signatures in human cancers as a guide

              to targeted therapies. Nature 2006 Jan 19;439(7074):353-357. [doi: 10.1038/nature04296] [Medline: 16273092]
         12.  Su J, Yoon BJ, Dougherty ER. Accurate and reliable cancer classification based on probabilistic inference of pathway
              activity. PLoS One 2009;4(12):e8161 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008161] [Medline: 19997592]
         13.  Cheng WY, Ou Yang TH, Anastassiou D. Biomolecular events in cancer revealed by attractor metagenes. PLoS Comput
              Biol 2013;9(2):e1002920 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002920] [Medline: 23468608]
         14.  PubMed search for breast cancer. URL: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/

              ?term=((breast+cancer))+AND+(%222000%22%5BDate+-+Publication%5D+%3A+%223000%22%5BDate+-+Publication%5D)
              [accessed 2014-02-24] [WebCite Cache ID 6NdE37LPi]
         15.  Good BM, Su AI. Crowdsourcing for bioinformatics. Bioinformatics 2013 Aug 15;29(16):1925-1933. [doi:
              10.1093/bioinformatics/btt333] [Medline: 23782614]
         16.  von Ahn L, Dabbish L. Designing games with a purpose. Commun. ACM 2008 Aug 01;51(8):57-67. [doi:
              10.1145/1378704.1378719]

         17.  Cooper S, Khatib F, Treuille A, Barbero J, Lee J, Beenen M, et al. Predicting protein structures with a multiplayer online
              game. Nature 2010 Aug 5;466(7307):756-760 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1038/nature09304] [Medline: 20686574]
         18.  Kawrykow A, Roumanis G, Kam A, Kwak D, Leung C, Wu C, Phylo players, et al. Phylo: A citizen science approach for
              improvingmultiplesequencealignment.PLoSOne2012;7(3):e31362[FREEFulltext][doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0031362]
              [Medline: 22412834]



         http://games.jmir.org/2014/2/e7/                                                     JMIR Serious Games 2014 | vol. 2 | iss. 2 | e7 | p.14
                                                                                                      (page number not for citation purposes)
XSL  •FO
RenderX
         JMIR SERIOUS GAMES                                                                                           Good et al


         19.  Luengo-OrozMA,ArranzA,FreanJ.Crowdsourcingmalariaparasitequantification:Anonlinegameforanalyzingimages
              of infected thick blood smears. J Med Internet Res 2012;14(6):e167 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.2196/jmir.2338] [Medline:
              23196001]
         20.  Kohavi R, John GH. Wrappers for feature subset selection. Artificial Intelligence 1997 Dec;97(1-2):273-324. [doi:

              10.1016/S0004-3702(97)00043-X]
         21.  Yesilbas A. io9. These-cool-games-let-you-do-real-life-science URL: http://io9.com/
              these-cool-games-let-you-do-real-life-science-486173006 [accessed 2014-06-17] [WebCite Cache ID 6QP1ukCNC]
         22.  Javanmardi S, Ganjisaffar Y, Lopes C, Baldi P. User contribution and trust in wikipedia. In: Collaborative Computing:
              Networking, Applications and Worksharing.: IEEE; 2009 Presented at: CollaborateCom; 2009; Washington D.C p. 1-6

              URL:http://pensivepuffin.com/dwmcphd/syllabi/info447_wi14/readings/07-WikipediaTrust/javanmardi-TrustInWikipedia.
              CollaborateCon2009.pdf [WebCite Cache] [doi: 10.4108/ICST.COLLABORATECOM2009.8376]
         23.  Wang J, Duncan D, Shi Z, Zhang B. Web-based gene set analysis toolkit (WebGestalt): Update 2013. Nucleic Acids Res
              2013 Jul;41(Web Server issue):W77-W83 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt439] [Medline: 23703215]
         24.  Paik S. Development and clinical utility of a 21-gene recurrence score prognostic assay in patients with early breast cancer

              treated with tamoxifen. Oncologist 2007 Jun;12(6):631-635 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1634/theoncologist.12-6-631]
              [Medline: 17602054]
         25.  Curtis C, Shah SP, Chin SF, Turashvili G, Rueda OM, Dunning MJ, METABRIC Group, et al. The genomic and
              transcriptomicarchitectureof2,000breasttumoursrevealsnovelsubgroups.Nature2012Jun21;486(7403):346-352[FREE
              Full text] [doi: 10.1038/nature10983] [Medline: 22522925]

         26.  Lauss M, Kriegner A, Vierlinger K, Visne I, Yildiz A, Dilaveroglu E, et al. Consensus genes of the literature to predict
              breast cancer recurrence. Breast Cancer Res Treat 2008 Jul;110(2):235-244. [doi: 10.1007/s10549-007-9716-3] [Medline:
              17899371]
         27.  Venet D, Dumont JE, Detours V. Most random gene expression signatures are significantly associated with breast cancer
              outcome. PLoS Comput Biol 2011 Oct;7(10):e1002240 [FREE Full text] [doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002240] [Medline:

              22028643]
         28.  The Cure game website. URL: http://genegames.org/cure/ [accessed 2014-02-24] [WebCite Cache ID 6NdDULq2v]
         29.  Open source code repository for The Cure. URL: https://bitbucket.org/sulab/thecure/ [accessed 2014-02-24] [WebCite
              Cache ID 6NdEQWw3D]


         Abbreviations
                GWAP: games with a purpose
                RFRS: Random Forest Relapse Score

                SVM: support vector machine




                Edited by G Eysenbach, C Boyer; submitted 24.02.14; peer-reviewed by W Luo, RS Sadasivam; comments to author 28.03.14; revised
                version received 18.04.14; accepted 31.05.14; published 29.07.14

                Please cite as:
                Good BM, Loguercio S, Griffith OL, Nanis M, Wu C, Su AI
                The Cure: Design and Evaluation of a Crowdsourcing Game for Gene Selection for Breast Cancer Survival Prediction
                JMIR Serious Games 2014;2(2):e7
                URL: http://games.jmir.org/2014/2/e7/ 
                doi:10.2196/games.3350
                PMID:



         ©Benjamin M Good, Salvatore Loguercio, Obi L Griffith, Max Nanis, Chunlei Wu, Andrew I Su. Originally published in JMIR
         Serious Games (http://games.jmir.org), 29.07.2014. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative

         Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
         reproduction in any medium, provided the original work, first published in JMIR Serious Games, is properly cited. The complete
         bibliographic information, a link to the original publication on http://games.jmir.org, as well as this copyright and license
         information must be included.








         http://games.jmir.org/2014/2/e7/                                                     JMIR Serious Games 2014 | vol. 2 | iss. 2 | e7 | p.15
                                                                                                      (page number not for citation purposes)
XSL  •FO
RenderX