Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2014, 11, 12866-12895; doi:10.3390/ijerph111212866

                                                                                           OPEN ACCESS
                                                                                 International Journal of

                                                                        Environmental Research and

                                                                                          Public Health
                                                                                         ISSN 1660-4601

                                                                           www.mdpi.com/journal/ijerph
Concept Paper


The Public Health Exposome: A Population-Based, Exposure

Science Approach to Health Disparities Research


Paul D. Juarez *, Patricia Matthews-Juarez , Darryl B. Hood , Wansoo Im ,             3,†
                  4                         5,†                       6                               7
Robert S. Levine , Barbara J. Kilbourne , Michael A. Langston , Mohammad Z. Al-Hamdan ,
William L. Crosson ,Maurice G. Estes , Sue M. Estes , Vincent K. Agboto , Paul Robinson ,          9

Sacoby Wilson and Maureen Y. Lichtveld         11,†

1
   Research Center on Health Disparities, Equity, and the Exposome, University of Tennessee Health
   Science Center, 66 N. Pauline, Memphis, TN 38105, USA; E-Mail: pmatthe3@uthsc.edu

2  Department of Environmental Health Sciences, College of Public Health, Ohio State University,

   Columbus, OH 43210, USA; E-Mail: hood.188@osu.edu
3  Vertices, Inc., 317 George Street 411, New Brunswick, NJ 08901, USA;

   E-Mail: wansooim@gmail.com
4  Department of Family & Community Medicine, Meharry Medical College, Nashville, TN 37208,

   USA; E-Mails: rlevine@mmc.edu (R.S.L.); vagboto@mmc.edu (V.K.A.)
5
   Department of Sociology, Tennessee State University, Nashville, TN 37209, USA;
   E-Mail: bkilbourne@tnstate.edu
6
   Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Tennessee, Knoxville,

   TN 37996, USA; E-Mail: langston@eecs.utk.edu
7  National Space Science and Te  chnology Center, UniversitiesSpace Research Association,

   NASA Marshall Space Flight Cente,rHuntsville, AL 35805, USA;
   E-Mails: mohammad.alhamda     n@nasa.gov (M.Z.A.); bill.c rosson@nasa.gov (W.L.C.);

   maury.estes@nsstc.uah.e  du (M.G.E.); sue.m.este s@nasa.gov (S.M.E.)
8
   National Space Science and Teh  cnology Center, Universityof Alabama, Huntsv    ille, AL 35805, USA;
   E-Mail: maury.este s@nsstc.uah.edu
9
   Department of Ophthalmology, Charles R. Drew University of Medicine and Science, Los Angeles,
   CA 90059, USA; E-Mail: paulrobinson@cdrewu.edu

10 Maryland Institute for Applied Environmental HealthS   ,chool of Public Health,University ofMaryland,

   College Park, MA 20742, USA;E-Mail: swilson2@umd.edu
11 Department of Global EnvironmentlaHealth Sciences, School of Pub      c Health and Tropical Medicine,

   Tulane University, 1440 Ca  nal Street, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA; E-Mail: mlichtve@tulane.edu

†
   These authors contributed equally to this work.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2014, 11                                                       12867


* Author to whom correspondence should be addressed; E-Mail: pjuarez@uthsc.edu;
   Tel.: +1-901-448-2016.

External Editors: Stephen Thomas, Devon Payne-Sturges, Christiane Bunge and Kenneth Olden


Received: 29 August 2014; in revised form: 12 November 2014 / Accepted: 27 November 2014 /
Published: 11 December 2014



      Abstract: The lack of progress in reducing health disparities suggests that new approaches
      are needed if we are to achievemeaningful, equitable,and lasting reductions. Current scientific

      paradigms do not ad equately capture the complexity of te relationships between environment,
      personal health and population level disparities. The public health exposome is presented

      as a universal exposure tracki ng framework for integrating co mplex relationships between
      exogenous and endogenous exposures across the lifespan from conception to death. It uses
      a social-ecological framework that builds on the exposome pa radigm for conceptualizing

      how exogenous exposures “get under the skin”. The public h ealth exposome approach has
      led our team to develop a taxono my and bioinformatics infrastructure to integrate health

      outcomes data with thousands of sources of exogenous exposure, organized in four broad
      domains: natural, built, social, and policy environments. With the input of a transdisciplinary
      team, we have borrowed and applied the methods, tools and terms from various disciplines

      to measure the effects of environmental exposrues on personal and popua ltion health outcomes
      and disparities, many of which may not manifest until many years later. As is customary

      with a paradigm shift, this approach has far reaching implications for research methods and
      design, analytics, community engagement strategies, and research training.

      Keywords:exposome; public health; health disparities; trans-disciplinary; exposure science;

      social-ecological; combinatorilaanalysis; CBPR; geographicalinformation systems; PPGIS




1. Introduction

   Since the release of the Secretary’s Task Force Report on Black and Minority Health [1] the health

disparities burden borne byracial/ethnic and other underserved populations hasshown little improvement.
Since 2003, Blacks have shown no significant change in disparities compared to Whites on 60 of the
73 measures of health care qual ity and access tracked and measured by the Agency for Healthcare

Research and Quality [2], while for two, disparities    actually increased (breast cancer diagnosed at
advanced stages among women 40 and over, and matern al deaths per 1000 live births). It has become

increasingly evident that without a radical new a    pproach in efforts to comprehend the underlying
causes of health disparities, our efforts to eliminate them are unlikely to succeed [3].

   The causes of health disparit    ies are varied, complex, and not     yet well understood [4–10].
Only 10% to 30% of the variance in cancer and        chronic disease outcomes, for instance, has been
attributed to genetic factors while the remaining 70%–09% has been attributed tothe environment [11,12].
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2014, 11                                                        12868


There is increasing evidence that social and ecologica l factors must be addressed together to eliminate
health disparities [13–16].
   Exposure science has evolved over the past thirty      years as a distinct fiel d, drawing from many

disciplines to shed light on the effects that enviro nmental exposures have on acute and chronic health
conditions [17–21]. Exposure science      is the study of stre   ssors, receptors, a nd their sources of

human contact within the environmental context of sp ace (geographic location, e.g., latitude/longitude
coordinates), place (attri butes assigned to the location, e.g. , home, work, park), and time [22–27].
The goal of exposure science is to identify and      understand fundamental, shared mechanisms and

common biological pathways (e.g., inflammation, methylation, oxidative stress, and other epigenetic
changes) underlying a broad range of complex dise          ases. This has direct implications for the

development of targeted personal and community health interventions [28–32].
   The need for an exposure science paradigm shif        t was identified in the recent U.S. National

Research Council publication: “Exposure Science in the 21st Century: A Vision and a Strategy” [17].
This report argued in favor of a broader approach to exposure        science. In addition to a focus on
human health, the report also recommended collecting exposure data that characterizes the ecosystem,

recognizing that a healthy ecosystem is among the pr erequisites for human health. It also suggested
that adoption and validation of an exposomics context “should lead to the development of a universal

exposure-tracking framework that allows for the cr eation of an exposure narra tive, the prediction of
biologically relevant human and ecologic exposur       es, and the generation of improved exposure
response.” The lack of this “exposure narrative”      significantly hampers community level exposure

investigations, especially those as sociated with technological disast ers such as the Gulf Oil Spill
in 2010 [33].

   Increasingly, investigators have adapted exposure     science and social-ecologi cal models to glean
insights into the underlying causal mechanisms th        rough which environmental exposures affect
personal health which may lead to population         level disparities [9,13,20,34–38]. Yet, traditional

exposure science models typically have attempted        to examine the impact of the environment on
disease through a reductionist appr oach, supported by discipline-drive n, theories that have led to

narrowly focused assessments, models, and analytics [11,17].
   The exposome has been proposed as an emergent         exposure science paradigm for conceptualizing

the cumulative effects of envir onmental exposures across the lifecycle (from conception to death)
and for examining the dynamic, multi-dimensional inter-relationships between environment and
health [3,20,21,23–25]. In 2005, Wild [22]       first described the exposom    e—the totality of one’s

lifetime exposures—as a conceptual framework for un derstanding the environmental context of health
outcomes. He differentiated between the “eco-exposome” as the point of contact between an external

environmental stressor and biological receptor of     an individual and the “endo-exposome” as the
inward effects arising from exposure on those receptors. A related term, the envirome, was initially used
to describe triggers affecting psychiatric illness [. Increasingly, in the context of environmental health

the envirome represents the constellation of psyc     hosocial factors that infl uence health. The term
has also been used to describe the effect of    the environment on genotype, resulting in phenotypic

variability [40]. To date, source-exposure-disease re lationships have been a ddressed primarily at an
endogenous level, with a focus on       the effects of exposure inward on human, internal chemical
environment [29]. Characterization of the “eco-exposome” has been far more challenging [22].
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2014, 11                                                        12869


   In 2011, we received a supplemental award from the Environmental Protection Agency to our P20,
NIMHD Health Disparities Research Center of Excellence at Meharry Medical College to
establish an Environmental Health Core (Grant Number 3P20MD000516-07S1). The aims of this grant

were to: (1) establish a    core that supports analysis of the co    mplex interactions between health
outcomes, disparities and the environment; (2) prom      ote the use of trans-disciplinary models and

analyses to increase knowledge about the complex       relationships between health disparities and the
environment, and (3) use public participatory geogr     aphic information systems (PPGIS) to engage
community stakeholders in the use of spatial da         ta and interactive mappi   ng to reduce health

disparities. To achieve these aims , the Center engaged a transdisci      plinary group of investigators
representing a broad array of disciplines and skill    s, including: (1) the physical, built, social and

policy environments; (2) health disparities conten     t areas; (3) a range of statistical models and
analytic techniques including multi-level analysis, predictive modeling, spatial analysis, and graph

theory/combinatorial analysis to analyze the complex relationships between health disparities and
environmental factors; (4) bioinformatics, and (5 ) decision support tools for engaging community
members in the research process, including data co llection. This new approach has implications not

only for how we conceptualize health disparities a nd conduct health disparities research, but also for
strategies to improve health outcomes and el        iminate disparities in vulnerable subpopulations.

A glossary of trans-disciplinary terms is presented in Appendix 1.
   The objectives of this manuscript are to:

   (1) present the public health exposome as an       integrated model for examining exogenous and
       endogenous source-exposure-disease relationships across the life      cycle and the influence of

       those relationships on health disparities at a population level;
   (2) describe the public health e xposome database, a 30-year, longitu dinal repository that integrates

       health and environmental databases;
   (3) provide an overview of the transdisciplinary me thods and analytics we have developed to help
       unravel the complex interactions between environm  ental stressors and bio-psycho-social systems at

       the individual, community, and so cial-ecological systems levels, as those relate to personal
       health and population level disparities;

   (4) discuss the use of emergent sources of exposur e data and the interface with bioinformatics and
       community engagement; and
   (5) examine the implications of the public h         ealth exposome paradigm for future health

       disparities research.

2. Public Health Exposome


2.1. Concepts

   A public health exposome paradigm is grounded in sy   stems theory [41] and a life cycle approach [42].

It provides a conceptual framework which can be used to identify and compare relationships between
differential levels of exposure at critical life stages, personal health outcomes, and health disparities at
a population level across space, place, and time. It allows for the generation and testing of hypotheses

about the pathways through which exogenous and endogenous exposures result in poor personal health
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2014, 11                                                      12870


outcomes and population level health disparities and enables the identification of at-risk persons and
health disparities communities and the targeting of public health interventions.
   In contrast to previous descri ptions of the “exposome” which have focused on the effects of

endogenous exposures, a PHE approach integrates        information about endogenous and exogenous
exposure mechanisms, processes and outcomes with        mediating and moderating factors at both the

individual and population health levels. The below PHE conceptual model (See Figure 1) presents an
integrative approach that can be used to both generate and test hypo theses about the underlying causal
mechanisms through which environmental exposures act at critical life stages from the molecular to

a population health level. This model has guided th e development of a bioinformatics infrastructure
that supports the assessment of    exposure characteristics on person al health outcomes across the

lifespan and challenges us to reexamine our understa nding of the relationship between personal health
and population level, health disparities.


                         Figure 1. Public health exposome conceptual model.


























2.2. Data Sources

   An exposure science approach has guided the de         velopment of the PHE conceptual model,
data repository, and bioinformatics infrastructure by this transdisciplinary team of inter-institutional

investigators which convened over the past three years through weekly teleconferences and quarterly
in-person meetings. This PHE c       onceptual model has guided formative research efforts for

conceptualizing pathways and generating hypotheses through which environmental exposures lead to
population level health disp arities and the establishm ent of a data repository for analyzing the direct
and indirect effects of environmental exposures across space, over time, and across the life span [34].
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2014, 11                                                        12871


   The PHE data repository includes data captured at various spatial and temporal units. It currently
stores over 12,000 variables that ha ve been geocoded and are being        harmonized at an annual and
county level in a relational databa se. Most of the health and enviro     nmental data in the PHE data

repository were obtained fr om publicly available si tes at no or low costs;    many were downloaded
directly from the web. However, some restricted data also are included in the data base. Approval was

received from the Meharry Medical College IRB to        cover handling and access to restricted data to
ensure confidentiality. A comprehensive list of data sources of the data we have collected in the public
health exposome repository is provided in Appendix 2.

   The goal of the PHE repository was to collect a     nnual, health and envir onmental exposure data,
for 3141 counties and county equivalents, over        30 years (1980–2010). While we recognize the

importance of using more granular levels of spa      tial and temporal data, such as block groups or
neighborhoods, apart from data provided by the U.S. Census, these data are rarely publically available.

The data repository currently incl    udes both raster (e.g.,   area level) including remotely sensed
meteorologic data [43–46] and vector (point) data        and various shape files (e.g., census tracts,
zip codes, metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs), etc.). The database also in cludes crosswalks which

allow us to convert spa    tial units to other units. Crosswalks a   llow for data obtained in smaller
geographic units such as census tracts, grid cells, or zip codes to be aggregated up to the county level.

Health and some exposure data, however, often are        only available at larger spatial units (such as
(MSAs), hospital referral regions (HRRs), and hospital service areas (HSAs) and as such, typically are
more challenging to convert to       counties or county equivalents.     We are exploring the use of

visualization, imputations, and synthetic estimates to apply attributes of th e population from a larger
unit to that of a smaller unit and other methodical    approaches for characterizing uncertainty due to

exposure misclassification, multiple sources of data, and different spatial scales [47,48].
   A taxonomy for distinguishing and measuring the           effects of different types of health and
exogenous exposures included in the database was developed. Health data were organized around six

broad areas of disparities (cancer     , cardio-metabolic dise ase, HIV/STIs, intentional/unintentional
injury, maternal and child health, and mental health and substance abuse) [1], and include measures of

mortality, morbidity, screening and     behaviors. Environmental data      are organized in four broad
domains: natural, built, social and policy environments. The natura l environment includes exposure

measures of air, climate, water, and land; the built environment includes attr ibutes of places we live,
work, play, learn and pray, with measures of           both quality, quantity, and access; the social
environment includes descriptors      of social/economic c onditions such as povert      y, crime, racial

segregation, and unemployment found in an area           or population; while the policy environment
includes data about governmental laws, ordinances and re gulations that have either a direct or indirect

impact on health.
   Data were originally collected and stored in ArcView 10.2, geographic information system (GIS)
and later reprocessed as a relationa l database in Microsoft SQL Server to support data queries and the

exporting of data to statistical software packages, including SPSS, SAS, R and STATA, and for use by
computational biology colleagues to perform high th roughput and combinatorial analysis. Having data

in a relational database allows for easier data queries in a format that does not require knowledge of a
GIS software program. A comprehensive data dictionary with metadata for all data elements has been
created in MS Access. We expect that the PHE data base will continue to grow as more data become
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2014, 11                                                        12872


available over time and to be con tinually refined as spatial-temporal and computational modeling and
analytic tools are developed.

3. Analytic Approaches


   A PHE approach supports the application of both        parametric and non-parametric methods and
statistical analyses, including those that are both  data and hypothesis driven and is not limited to

underlying assumptions of independence or normal            distribution. The PHE data infrastructure
supports the handling of “Big Data”, non-parametr         ic probability distributions, and spatial and
temporal auto-correlation and can be used by a broad array of rese       arch approaches and analytics,

including Bayesian models, predictive modeli         ng, computational spatial analysis, and graph
theory/combinatorial analysis and simulation—analytc   i tools used more commonl y in other disciplines,

such as mathematics, GIS, engineering, and com         putational biology. Three approaches that take
advantage of the relational struct ure of the database show great pr     omise for future use with the

public health exposome include multi-level, spatia     l, and computational and     combinatorial models
and analytics. A comparison of the three approaches is presented in Appendix 3 (Table A1).

3.1. Multi-Level Analysis


   A multi-level approach that explicitly recognizes the embedded nature of health outcomes within its
biological, social, ecological , and community contexts is likely to provide a better understanding of

disease across the life course and to explain heterogeneities in health disparities across socioeconomic
and geographic boundaries that, to date, remain largely unexplained. [49,50].This approach underscores
the need to measure health disparitie s within a social-ecological context     as opposed to examining

health disparities without any reference to environmental characteristics [51,52].
   Multi-level analyses are particul arly suitable for analyzing contex tual data, because they take

into account the hierarchical stru cture and the nested nature (spatia l and temporal) of the database,
allowing for the simultaneous examination of indivi dual and group-level factors. Other advantages of
multi-level analysis include being able to diffe         rentiate “independent” effects, assess the

reciprocal relationships between    factors at different levels, and estimate how much complex
between-group variability is explained by contextual factors [37,52].

   For example, variations in asthma occur within a social and ecological context that can benefit from
employing an explicit multi-level analytical strategy    (see Figure 2). Such an approach allows the

investigator to: (1) quantify th   e extent to which asthma is        clustered by neighborhood and
community grouping; (2) quantify both the extent to which neighborhood variations in asthma are due
to the clustering of ri sk factors and the extent to which the eff ect of individual risk factors vary from

neighborhood to neighborhood; and (3) quantify the re lative importance of individual, neighborhood
and societal level exposures in predicting individual asthma. These three constitutive components of a

multi-level analytic framework have important implications for asthma as well as other areas of
disparities research.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2014, 11                                                        12873


3.2. Spatial-Temporal Analysis

   GIS and spatial-temporal analysis also offer us       eful tools that can be used both for data
visualization of spatial and tempor al patterns [53,54] and for analysis    of spatially and temporally

continuous data. Mapping can be used to visualize geographic patterns and temporal trends at a county
level, generate hypotheses, and iden tify “hot spots” to guide further    data collection efforts and the

targeting of public health interventions. In addition to generating traditional static maps (e.g., rates per
100,000), GIS supports data visualiza     tion tools for modeling spatial and temporal relationships.
Spatial analysis provides the tools to examine th    e relationships between socioeconomic riskscapes,

environmental health hazard sources, socially vul      nerable neighborhoods, and health disparities,
including hotspot analysis and cluster and outlier an alysis to display changes in patterns over time.

Spatial statistical methods such as kernel densit   y estimation, trend surface analysis, seasonal time
series trend decomposition, and spatial autocorrelation are geo-statistics that can be used for analyzing

the spatial and temporal relationships that         exist among diseases, environments, population
characteristics and health disparities within or between defined populations and geographic areas.

      Figure 2. A multi-level ecological approach to explain heterogeneities in asthma

      expression across socioeconomic and geographic boundaries.

























   In recent years, there have been increasing effort s to use GIS and mapping to visualize spatial and

temporal aspects of public and environmental health issues. The PHE approach differs in a number of
important ways from other public       health data sharing a nd visualization portals that have been
developed, such as those supported by the Center        for Disease Control and Prevention’s National

Environmental Public Health Tracking Network (h ttp://ephtracking.cdc.gov/showHome.action) [55],
the Environmental Protection Agency’s EJView         (http://epamap14.epa.gov/ejmap/entry.html) [56],

Community Commons (http://www.communitycommons .org/maps-data/) [57], Opportunity Nation
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2014, 11                                                        12874


(http://opportunityindex.org) [58], and the Healthy Commun           ities Institute (http://www.healthy
communitiesinstitute.com/) [59]. First, the PHE a pproach provides a comprehensive and integrative
theoretical framework for identifying environmental exposures and for conceptualizing the mechanisms

through which exposures affect biological processes, personal health outcomes, and lead to population
level disparities. An underlying theoretical model is     generally lacking in these other approaches.

Second, the PHE is not limited by traditional discip     linary boundaries in conceptualizing exposures
(e.g., public health, environmental h ealth, social determinants, or pub lic policy) which underlie these
other efforts. Third, the PHE is more than a mapping tool; it is fundamentally a research tool. While we

recognize the importance of visualization and co mmunity mapping—especially as web tools—online
efforts are limited by thei r ability to display mu ltiple types of vect or and raster data simultaneously;

it quickly overwhelms. Fourth, detecting patterns from maps often is a matter of spatial and temporal
scale which may be extremely difficult to capture on a web portal. Lastly, the PHE repository supports

multiple types of tools and analytics which can be     used to address limitations that arise from using
geo-spatial data, including spatial autocorrelation and spatial uncertainty.

3.3. Combinatorial Analysis


   “Big Data” analytics is the proce ss of examining large amounts of da ta to detect hidden patterns,
unknown correlations and other useful      information. In this paper, we use the term “Big Data” to

refer to the use of data driven approaches, such as graph theory and combinatorial analysis, rather than
referring to the sheer size of the data [60].
    The application of “Big Data” analytics and tools to the public health exposome data can be used to

help explain heterogeneities in health disparities across socioeconomic and geographic boundaries that
to date, have remained largely unexplained. Combinatorial analysis employs high performance parallel

implementations using the power of mathematical ab straction to compile correlations in “Big Data”
sets into statistically robust inter-related clusters. By extracting and highlighting variable sets common
to multiple relationships (cliques and other dense sub- graphs), these tools can be used to determine

inflection points and other patterns of possible inte    rest, and to perform analysis using the latest
mathematical tools, innovative gr aph algorithms, and powerful computational platforms to uncover

latent but meaningful relations hips on an immense scale [60]. Methods for querying and mining
“Big Data” are fundamentally different from traditional statistical analysis on smaller samples.

“Big Data” often is more valuable than small samples because general statistics obtained from frequent
patterns and correlation analysis usually overpower      individual fluctuations an d can disclose more
reliable hidden patterns and knowledge. Further, interconnected “Big Data” forms large heterogeneous

information networks with which information re         dundancy can be explored to compensate for
missing data, crosscheck conflicting cases, validate trustworthy relationships, discloseinherent clusters,

and uncover hidden relationships and models. Most cl ustering approaches are limited by the fact that
the clusters produced are disjointed, requiring that      a variable be assigned to a single cluster.
This greatly simplifies the analysis. One challenge is to define these filters in such a way that they

do not discard useful information.
   By employing high performance parallel implementations and the power of mathematical abstraction

we have been able to extract and highlight variab      le sets common to multiple relationships and to
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2014, 11                                                        12875


determine inflection points and ot her patterns of possible interest . High throughput analysis (HTA)
uses the latest mathematical tools, innovativ      e graph algorithms, and powerful computational
platforms to uncover latent but meaningful relations    hips on an immense scale, providing research

opportunities to data mine at multiple levels of gr anularity. We have used HTA (combinatorics and
graph theory) to compile weak correlations usi ng a subset of 600 variables from more than 12,000

PHE variables into statistically robust inter-related lsters and to identify relevance networks, beginning
with a symmetric correlation matrix [60].

3.4. Multi-Modal Analytic Approach


   We have found it advantag  eous to apply multipleytpes of analytics to addres the complex relationships
between environmental exposures a nd health disparities. For exampl e, while many individual risk

factors associated with poor pregnancy-related outcomes are known, limited progress has been made to
date regarding the complex spatial-temporal nature     of the relationships be tween pregnancy related

morbidities and mortalities, environmental exposur es and population level disparities. The below
example illustrates the use of a multi-model analytic approach to examine these complex relationships
across states combining the use of GIS and spatial analysis, graph theoretical analysis, combinatorial

analysis, and traditional statistical analytics.
   We used a PHE approach to examine the social           -ecological context of   premature birth [61].

GIS was used to map the rates of premature birth at     a county level for the 50 states. A county-level
database was created to integrate health outcomes and environmenta l exposure data from each of the
four PHE domains (natural, built,    social and policy environments).     Graph theoretical algorithms,

combinatorial analytics and traditi   onal statistical methods then we    re used to uncover putative
inter-linking associations of PHE exposure variables (natural, built, social and policy environments)

with premature birth rates. Fo r a more detailed discussion of these methods, see Langston, et al. [60].
Using county-level data from the      PHE database, we first constructe d a complete, finite, simple,
undirected and edge-weighted graph, where each        node represented a variable, and each edge was

weighted by the correlation coe     fficient of its endpoints. Paracli ques/factors were derived from
600 exposure variables using combinatorial analysis. Sp atially adjusted regression analysis, with and

without spatial autoco rrelation, was then used to model pregna ncy related outcomes. This approach
allowed inclusion of a large number of different      and highly divergent popula tion level variables,

reducing the number of variables under review th rough graph theoretical techniques, which permitted
us to apply traditional and otherwise unscalable st     atistical analysis techni ques. Resulting models
explained a substantial proportion of pregnancy re lated health outcomes supporting the value of the

PHE approach in studying health disparities [61].

4. Implications


   The PHE paradigm provides opportuni ties to strengthen th e evidence base for health disparities
research, practice, policy, community engagement, a nd research training in uni que, transdisciplinary,
and interdependent ways, supporting research adva nces in the following areas: individual exposure

characterization; community-level, environmental,      epidemiologic cohort studies ; health disparities
research; community-based participatory research (CBPR) methods; research at the intersection of the
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2014, 11                                                        12876


eco-system and human health; and training a new cad          re of emerging transdisciplinary scholars.
Figure 3 presents two research traj ectories: research targeting knowle dge gain as depicted on the
X-axis represents a continuum fr om knowledge acquisition, to valida tion, transfer and ultimately to

translation. On the Y-axis, research occurs along the translation con tinuum from molecular (basic) to
applied and ultimately to population-level inquiries.    A significant amount of research in general,

and exposure research specifically, has been conducted in the basic      sciences to achieve knowledge
acquisition or validation (left quadrants) of the effects of environmental exposures. A growing, but still
limited body of work is devoted to a ddressing health disparities at the population level and translation

beyond the traditional clinicalsettings (right quadrants).

         Figure 3. Application of the public health exposome in environmental health research.























4.1. Research Implications


   For environmental health research, population leve     l studies (right upper  quadrant of Figure 3)
traditionally have been hamperedby limitations (small denominator, in complete exposure characterization)

that potentially now can be addressed by a PHE approach. Specifically, the vast database harnessed by
the PHE can allow for enhanced risk assessments      using reasonably acceptable surrogates, as well as
facilitate health outcome analyses using a robust   denominator. In turn, the possibility of doing both

types of assessments informs the design of tailore d environmental epidemiologic studies, increasing
the likelihood for meaningful results in a resource- effective manner.

   The PHE advances health disparities research in five critical aspects (see Figure 4): (1) Overcomes
study design limitations. Human health studies favor a randomized controlled trial design, the gold
standard in providing the most dir ect evidence of causation. This desi gn is frequently not possible to

implement because exposures to contaminants have often already occurred and prospectively exposing
humans is ethically inappropriate . Obtaining a representative study       sample and control subjects,

and confounding social determinants are among the          most common limitations of environmental
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2014, 11                                                        12877


studies. Several of these limitations are now addressed by deploying the PHE paradigm. (2) Leverage
secondary data: Specifically in the context of environmental health, data not originally collected to
assess potential exposures to hazardous substances      are seldom useful even as baseline measures.

The PHE database and analytics suite will, at a        minimum, enable geospatial documentation of
contaminant sources to target potential populations at risk for further evaluation taking into account the

requirement to assess the presence of potentially completed exposure pathways. (3)Strengthen cumulative
risk models. By taking a life course approach as well as integrating multiple proximal and distal factors
influencing health disparities, public health re    search can target primar    y data collection more

effectively time- and cost-wise. In addition, th   e PHE can support the development of predictive
models, facilitating tailored prevention and inte       rvention efforts in vulnerable communities.

(4) Advance exposure characterization.       Insufficient exposure characterization, especially past
exposures, and lag time between exposure and study significantly hamper the conduct of environmental

epidemiologic studies. The PHE         framework offers impo rtant opportunities to      strengthen the
knowledgebase of exposure science. For example,         the framework operationalizes environmental
exposures in four broad domains: na tural, built, social and policy. The PHE enables capture of nested

complexities of exposures, and provi des a model that allows for the in tegration of exposure data on
personal, bio-psycho-social- and health conditions ta king into account the social-ecological context.

Traditionally, the epidemiology of health disparitie s has focused on individua l-level risk factors and
family factors while far less attention has been give n to the broader social-ecological context in which
individuals live, work, learn, play, and pray. A more comprehensive approach that considers the range

of social and ecological factors that co-vary with lower SES and minority group status (e.g., differential
environmental exposures, residential segregation,     psychological stress, housing quality, and social

capital, etc. ) is needed to tease apart these relationships [62,63]. (5)   Incorporates new statistical
methods and technologies . The PHE platform supports the collect ion of data in both a GIS and a
relational database and provides multiple methods of      data mapping and visualization and spatial,

mathematical, and statistical modeling and analyses . These methods enable us to include many more
variables than are usually included in environmental public health studies and to take advantage of the

range of data that is now available.

                Figure 4. Public health exposome: advancing health disparities research.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2014, 11                                                        12878


4.2. Implications for Public Health Practice

   The notion that the health of the environment is in    timately linked to that of humans is receiving

increased recognition [25]. A PHE pa radigm puts us in a better posi        tion to address th e role that
historical burdens of exposures have manifested in all four PHE domains. The use of GIS and other
spatial modeling and simulation tool s can help research and community partners better visualize past

environmental media contamination and prospectively        model potential future risk [64]. Visualizing
environmental contamination in this way demystif       ies exposure science and makes the limitations

scientists face more real for community partners. The need to bolsterthe translation of ecosystem-human
health research portfolio and tools by putting data into the hands of end users is becoming more urgent

in the context of both natural and technological di sasters such as the Hurric ane Katrina, Super Storm
Sandy, and the Gulf of Mexico oil spill [32]. Remote-sensing derived data and spatial analyses of both
environment and human health data can significantly contribute both to this emerging research area as

well as to public health practice and policy. For exampl e, the use of remote sensing data allows us to
identify areas affected by high levels of PM   2.5and to translate findings into tailored proactive health

education messages targeting sensitive sub-populations such as children with childhood asthma as well
as their health care providers. Employing the analyt ical capabilities of a PHE approach can be used to

help us identify both distal and pr oximal surrogate indicators of exposu re in the absence of direct
exposure measurements.
   In addition, a PHE approach has implications not only for health care, public and environmental

health researchers but for health care, public and e nvironmental health, and social service providers,
as well. Tools such as health impact assessments (HIA), community mapping, and public participatory

geographic information systems (PPGIS) can be used to facilitate not only collaborative learning but
also to stimulate concrete and effective contributions to research, practice and policy beyond a specific

study [65–67]. HIAs have proven to be informative, yet such assessments are not uniformly used when
developing new environmental policies. A PHE database can complement HIAs by providing access to

more accurate exposure data from a practice-based, upstream, historical context. Application of a PHE
paradigm to health disparities provides the foundati on for more effectively translating science into
practice. Similarly, PHE derived data    and maps can be used to assist      health care pr oviders make

prescriptive recommendations about behaviors outside the clinic walls by identifying threats within the
social ecological environments in which individual patients live,       work, learn, play, and pray and

resources to mitigate them.

4.3. Policy Implications.


   From an environmental health perspective, more       accurate exposure informa tion at the individual
and community level can facilitate translation in        to more effective health and environmental
policies [68]. Likewise, gaps in existing policy can         inform research priorities. For example,

identification of vulnerable populations can lead to environm ental health policies that offer better
community protection, with an aim of promoting heal th equity in a proactive fashion rather than

addressing environmental justice issues after      the fact [68–74]. Informed by a PHE paradigm,
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2014, 11                                                        12879


science-driven environmental health policies then can      be translated into evidence-based, frontline,
public health practice to provide more effective, tailored health services for vulnerable sub-populations.
   The analytical and technological functions supported by the PHE da tabase also can serve both an

important role in informing the development of new social and environmental policies and in evaluating
the “prevention and protection effect iveness” of existing policies, to ensure they are not having the

unintended consequence of increasing      disparities. This is critical in light of work of Levine and
colleagues [75–77] who have previous ly shown clear relationships between the passage of federal
laws which were intended to increase coverage of         health benefits, and subsequent increases in

racial health disparities.
   The PHE paradigm can be used to       strengthen the linkages between science, practice and public

policy, resulting in improved health and wellbeing (s ee Figure 5). PHE informed research should lead
to the identification of gaps in    practice and strategies for reducing    risk. As with practice gaps,

a PHE informed assessment of health system func          tioning can elucidate gaps in public policy,
and strategies for translating a  nd applying research findings into     policy. Frontline public health
practitioners are well positioned to inform the heal   th disparities research agenda by providing real

world feedback on the effectiveness of practice and po licies, especially those originally intended to
advance community protection and address historic burden of health disparities.


               Figure 5. Public health exposome: informing science, policy and practice.

















4.4. Community Engagement


   Increasingly, community based pa rticipatory research (CBPR) me thods have been employed to
examine the social-ecological context of health disp arities which considers the determinants of health
and disease to include a broad ra    nge of factors, including biomed ical, social, economic, cultural,

historical, and political [78–80]. CBPR has been promoted as a co-learning and empowering process
that facilitates the reciprocal transfer of knowledge, skills, capacity, and power between academic and

community partners rather than being a specific     research methodology [81–83]. There is increasing
evidence which supports the use of CBPR as an effective strategy forbuilding trust between researchers,

communities and populations being studied, contributi ng to the quality of study designs, methods and
dissemination of findings, and stimulating practice-based research. Because the research is “grounded”
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2014, 11                                                    12880


in the real life experiences of people, findings ar e more likely to lead to collective action and policy
change [84]. Community-academic partnerships have       proven specifically effective in post-disaster

settings where the relevance of research to policy and practice is paramount [85].
   Public participatory geographic information systems (PPGIS) offers a new approach for engaging

community partners in health disparities resear    ch within a place-based ecological framework,
advancing CBPR methods by employi ng crowdsourcing, smart phones, a nd other personalized data
collection technologies and appli cations [86–91]. PPGIS harnesses emerging information tools and

technologies to gather, measure, analyze, and ma p place-based, geospatial captured data which can be
used to visualize population level risk factors and community assets , conduct environmental health

impact and neighborhood needs assessments, and develop and implement targeted interventions aimed
at improving health conditions at a neighborhood le vel [92,93]. PPGIS is a promising approach that

can be used to provide: (1) community partners with access to historical data, resources, and interactive
mapping tools that can be used to analyze the environmental context of user generated questions about

health disparities; (2) baseline data which can be used to evaluate the impact of targeted interventions;
and (3) an informatics infrastructure that ca   n accommodate data collected from smart phone,

crowdsourcing, and social media tec hnologies. It also can help overc ome challenges arising from
limited publicly available data.
   Our team has combined the use of PPGIS and      crowdsourcing methods, customized smart phones,

and interactive mapping websites to put the power     of GIS into the hands of community members
allowing community end users to        visualize environmental conditions , assets, and risk factors

at a neighborhood level with minima     l training [34]. We  currently are pioneerin g the integration
of PPGIS methods with inter      active mapping websites (see: ht     tp://www.immemphis.com [53],
                                                                                         ©
http://www.communitymappingforhealthequity.org [54] and which incorporate Mappler          technology
to provide community partners with access to data, maps, and decision support tools, enabling them to
                                                                                                 ©
identify and address issues of concern w ithout the need for academic intermediaries. Mappler      is a
smart phone application that supports real-time data collection at a neighborhood level by community

partners [92] and is capable of   taking full advantage of built-i n, smart phone features, including
camera, internet access, time stamp, light measur  es, gyroscope, accelerometer, GPS and Bluetooth
technologies with near real time interface to internet linked databases.
                                                                          ©
   In 2012, we used PPGIS and crowdsourcing methods and          Mappler   technology to address the
gas shortages in the aftermath of Super storm Sandy in the New Yo rk/New Jersey region, in near real
                   ©
time [94]. Mappler was used to develop a customized brief survey for the smartphone which, in turn,
was used by a group of volunteer high school students to call all of the service stations in the New

York/New Jersey coast areas affected by Super stormSandy about their gas availability [95]. Data were
updated daily to the cu stomized website: http://mappler.net/gasstation/ until the gas availability crisis

subsided [96]. Survey questions included whether    there was a telephone response, whether the gas
station was open, their hours, if the service station had gas available, the types of gas availability, how

long they expected it to last, current waiting time, and whether they were using a back-up generator for
power. While the customized website was developed to respond to the gas availabilityneeds of affected
residents,Mappler alsowas used by both FEMA and White Houso      efficials during theimmediate aftermath

of Hurricane Sandy to monitor gas av ailability and plan emergency response efforts, demonstrating the
huge upside potential of PPGIS and related crowdsourcing and social media technologies.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2014, 11                                                        12881


4.5. Transdisciplinary Research Training

   Operationalization of a public health exposome into       four broad domains has had the effect of
stimulating transdisciplinary co llaborations. This has profound im        plications both for how we

conceptualize the composition of research teams as well as for how we organize and structure research
training cores within health disparities and envir    onmental health research centers. To effectively

conduct research informed by a PHE approach requires research teams to include scientists with highly
specialized knowledge and skills from a broad array of disciplines, including the natural/earth sciences,
engineering and urban planning, social and behavioral sciences, and policy sciences; content experts in

each of the broad areas of health disparities, in      cluding clinicians, toxicologists, and molecular
epidemiologists; and highly specialized professionals , in mathematics and computer science, GIS,

web design and information technology, bio-informatics, “Big Data”, and statistics. Creating a cadre of
emerging, transdisciplinary scholars skilled in this   broad array of fields   however, will require the

breaking down of barriers created by      traditional academic disciplines as well as existing research
funding mechanisms.

5. Limitations


   Construction of a single, integr ated, public health exposome databa se offers many challenges that
will require significant commitment and resources to maintain and update. Obtain ing data in each of

the different domains of the PHE, for instance, provi des its own set of unique issues. Some of these
challenges are cross-cutting, while others are more specific to a specific domain or unique to a dataset.
   Cross-cutting issues include a lack of standardiza tion of how social constructs are defined and how

variables are coded, spatially and    temporally, data collection protoc ols, harmonization standards,
policies, and regulatory framewor ks. Development of a common informatics infrastructure that

supports de-identification of data , data sharing, management, stor age; protocols fo r updating data,
standardization of data dictionari es including nomenclature and meta -data; and the use of restricted
and crowd-sourced data also are ne eded. In addition, validation and ve tting of data generated from

social media have not yet been fully addressed.
   Restrictions in accessing sub-county level health     data present another challenge. These current

restrictions prevent use of persona l health data which might be usef ul in identifying and targeting
“hot spots” and severely restrict research efforts   that promote a population he alth approach to the

elimination ofhealth disparities.Laws that were enacted to ensure patient and/or provider confidentiality
present a major challenge to the PHE approach a       nd public health research. The Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 [97] an d the Public Health Serv ice Act (42 U.S. Code

242m(d)) [98] currently prohibit data collected by the National Center for Health Statistics from being
displayed in any way that might allow the identi       fication of an individual   in a geographic area.

However, there is no single standard used by federal, state and local agencies to protect confidentiality.
Some agencies use a minimum nu merator (e.g., HRSA data warehouse suppresses data for birth and
infant mortality statistics for aggregated values where the value for any single combination of gender

and race for the year is less than 10 for the given geography (http://datawarehouse.hrsa.gov/
data/aboutdata/infantmortalitydatasupression.aspx) [99] while othe rs use a minimum denominator
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2014, 11                                                        12882


(HIPAA guidelines allow record-level data to be         shared for geographic areas with more than
20,000 people). Further complicating this is that policies on data suppression have changed over time
based on disease and changes in laws resulting in different data use policies.

   Another challenge we encountered was that annu al, county-level mortality data from CDC Wonder
(the main source for mortality da ta) often are unavailable due to sm all numbers resulting in a large

amount of unreliable data, particularly in rural c ounties, where the number of annual, cause specific
deaths are fewer than ten. To get around this, we aggregatedmultiple years of data tobe able to generate
a rate for a multi-year period. Without access to geo-spatial information for sub-county health data, future

opportunities to address population health and target interventions to health disparities populations in
greatest need will be sverely hampered and its uesfulness for identifyig and targeting diparities limited.

   One of the greatest challenges in adapting a PHE approach, however, is that itwill require a revolution
both in the ways that science is conducted and f unded [100]. The PHE moves away from a traditional,

categorical, reductionist approach towards an integrated, holistic approach in understanding the causal
pathways through which exogenous and endogenous e          xposures operate, their impact on biological
and bio-psycho-social systems, and ultimately on       their combined impact on personal health and

community-level health disparities. This falls outside the current domain of any specific NIH center or
institute raising the question of which agency will fund this type of transdisciplinary research.


6. Conclusions

   Scientific understanding of how      external exogenous environmenta l exposures are related to
individual endogenous exposures at the target orga      n level and the effects of these exposures on

biological systems and personal health outcomes       and their potential impact on population health
disparities is in its formative stages. A PHE paradigm envisions the origins of health disparities as the

continuous and dynamic in terface between person and environm           ent from conception to death,
over time, space, and place. It uses a life course, sy stems approach and a social ecological theoretical
framework for linking exogenous and endogenous expos          ures across the lifespan, providing more

complete exposure pathway models, and engaging comm unity participation in the research process.
The PHE provides opportunities for compiling a more complete exposure profile than what is available

today in terms of space, place, and time with more accurate measures of when, how often, how long,
and how much exposure occurred. It adds to the         current exposomics literature by increasing our

understanding of the impact of multiple exogenous           exposures, the social gradient of health,
how biological systems are affected over time by e       nvironmental exposures, the impact of those
exposures at a molecular level, and their combined     contribution to disparitie s at a population level.

The speed with which our understanding of the re       lationships between e xogenous and endogenous
exposures develops will have a great d eal to do with the capacity of PHE data to achieve its full potential.

   The current PHE data repository was derived primarily from publically available datasets. The data
infrastructure allows both for ongoing expansion of the database, including the addition of new data
sets and additional years of data, as well as for the incorporation of greater amounts of both personal

and population level data from a variety of sources      , such as local government , electronic health
records, wearable health devices, PPGIS crow        d sourcing, and web mapping services (WMS).

With adequate safeguards, the data infrastructure c ould readily be expanded to include personal health
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2014, 11                                                       12883


data, such as those derived from electronic health     records, longitudinal cohort studies, syndromic
surveillance systems, and health information exchanges.
   A PHE approach supports retrosp ective and prospective systems theory modeling and methods,

including advanced and complex multi-level, spatia l, Bayesian, and high throughput mathematical
designs. Towards this end, we have pioneered the        use of data-driven, graph theory/combinatorial

techniques and analytics from co mputational biology to identify rela tionships among the myriad of
environmental exposure and population health data       points. High throughput math ematical analysis
strategies allow for analysis of at amounts of secondary data which allow for alarger study denominator,

overcoming a major flaw of many environmental           epidemiologic studies. The spatial, temporal,
and nested nature of the dataset   makes it a natural source for applyi   ng a wide range of analytics

including Bayesian, multi-level, and computational spatial analysis.
   The use of longitudinal data also    provides an alternative approach to collecting cost-prohibitive

exposure data. Used in conjunction with longitudi      nal cohort studies that in  corporate biological,
genomic, and tissue samples with clinical and soci      al-behavioral data, the PHE approach has the
potential to move science a step closer towards identifying the bi ological mechanisms through which

environmental exposures affect health and how they result in population level health disparate.
   The most significant contributions of the PHE are in strengthening exposure characterization from

three distinct but interdependent perspectives: data generation, storage, and an alysis. Other scientific
contributions of a PHE include how we conceptualiz e entire, exposure-disease pathways, the need for
transdisciplinary research teams and training programs, and how we adopt new methods that utilize

data generated from rapidly deve loping technological changes in bi omedical informatics (electronic
health records, personal health monitoring de    vices), GIS, crowdsourcing, smart phone, computer,

and web technologies.
   A paradigm shift to a PHE approach also provides a promising roadmap for engaging community
partners and for creating a stronger, multi-faceted evidence base for environmental justice.

Engaging community partners in research has long        been recognized as important not only for the
development of a better understanding of the causes of    health disparities but for the design of more

effective community interventions and environmental policies. The addition of PPGIS tools such as
Mappler © interactive mapping technologysignificantly advancesopportunities for community engagement

by providing community partners with access to       technologies and community mapping tools that
enable them to fully participat e in the research process and e xposure characterization, strengthening
the community collaborative foundation of CBPR. E        nvironmental justice rese arch, combined with

PPGIS-enabled community partners, can inform the          translation of evidence-based environmental
policies into effective frontline public health practice.

   Adoption of a public health exposome approach ch allenges many of the traditional ways in which
health disparities research has been conducted, organized, and funded and will require a paradigm shift
for both health disparities researchers and funding agencies. It will require valuing the use of both data

driven and hypothesis driven approaches. It will en tail the development of new epistemologies and
theories for conceptualizing the bio-psychos-soc    ial pathways through which environment affects

health. It demands a robust bioinformatics infras tructure and taxonomy for linking personal attribute
data (genetic, epigenetic, omics, behavior, and ps     ychosocial), direct and indirect environmental
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2014, 11                                                      12884


exposure data, and health behavior , screening, and outcomes data. It will necessitate the use of new
theories, models, methods and analytics to understand and assess those relationships.
   Application of an exposure science approach to health disparities has challenged us to rethink how

the center was organized to best sup port translational health disparitie s research. It has required us to
develop new transdisciplinary pedagogies and training programs to prepare investigators in an era of

“Big Data”. Embedding a transdisciplinary appro       ach as a required core in future PHE-driven,
translational research, for instance, will significan tly increase the likelihood of building a sustainable
cadre of new generation, environmen tal public health scientists and h ealth disparities investigators.

Rather than creating separate cores around bioinformatics, biostatistics and other research functions we
chose to establish an Informatics and Analytics Core that supports th e integration of diverse types of

data, including biological, tissue, clinical, imaging, and environmental datasets and an expanded range
of analytics, including statistical, spatial, and computational analysis. To accomplish this we have had to

recruit collaborating investigators with expertise in“Big Data”, mathematicalmodeling and algorithms,
GIS, mapping, predictive modelingand simulation, and other methodssupported by a PHE approach.
   In summary, these authors offer the PHE as an a       lternative exposure scienc e paradigm that is

particularly relevant for the study  of health disparities. The PHE mo ves away from a traditional,
categorical, reductionist approach towards an integrated, systems science approach to understand

the causal pathways through which exogenous and e       ndogenous exposures operate , their impact on
biological and bio-psycho-social systems, and ultim ately, their combined impact on personal health
and community-level health disparities.


Acknowledgments

   We wish to thank Katy Kilbourne, Vicente Samaniego, Tyler Skelton, and Charlotte Woods, for their

tireless efforts and dedicated support in preparingand managing data and generating maps. “Funding for
this article was made possible (in part) by 3P     20MD000516-07S1 by a grant received from the
Environmental Protection Agen  cy and the National Center on Minority Health an d Health Disparities. The

views expressed in written conferencematerials or publications and by speakers and moderators do not
necessarily reflect the official polciies of the Departmentof Health and Human Serices; nor does mention

by trade names, commercial practie cs, or organizations ply endorsement by th e U.S. Government”.

Author Contributions


   Paul D. Juarez provided the overall scientific leadership for the development of the PHE model,
data information system, and writing of the paper. Patricia Matthews-Juarez contributed to the writing
of the Transdisciplinary resarch team section and overall editing of the paper.Darryl Hood, contributed to

the conceptual framework and writing of the b      ackground section. Wansoo Im contributed to the
writing of the Community Engagement Decision Support Tools section of the paper. Robert S. Levine

contributed to the conceptual framework and editing ofthe paper; Barbara J. Kilbourne contributed to the
writing of the Results and Discussi on section of the paper. Michael    A. Langston contributed to the
writing of the Background and Results and Discussion sections of the paper. Mohammad Z. Al-Hamdan

contributed to the development of the PHE framewor k. Vincent Agboto contributed to the development
of the PHE framework. William L. Crosson contributed to the development of the PHE framework.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2014, 11                                                       12885


Maurice G. Estes contributed to the development of the PHE framework. Sue Estes contributed to the
development of the PHE framewor k. Paul Robinson contributed to the development of the PHE
framework. Sacoby Wilsoncontributed to the development of thePHE framework. Maureen Y. Lichtveld

contributed to the overall conceptual frmework, writing and editing of the paper.

Conflicts of Interest


   The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References

1.    Heckler, M. Report of the Secretary’s Task Force on      Black & Minority Health Report of the

      Secretary’s Task Force on Black and Minority Health ; U.S. Department of Health and Human
      Services: Washington, DC, USA, 1985.

2.    Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality.       2012 National Healthcare Disparities Report ;
      United States Department of Health and Human Services: Rockville, MD, USA, 2013.
3.    Buck Louis, G.M.; Sundaram, R. Exposome: Time for transformative research. Stat. Med. 2012,

      31, 2569–2575.
4.    Sartorius, B. Modeling determinants, impact, and     space-time risk of age-specific mortality in

      rural South Africa: Integrating met hods to enhance policy relevance. Glob. Health Action 2013,
      6, doi:10.3402/gha.v6i0.19239.

5.    Carroll, J.E.; Diez Roux, A.V.; F itzpatrick, A.L.; Seeman, T. Low social support is associated
      with shorter leukocyte telomere     length in late life:  Multi-ethnic study of atherosclerosis.
      Psychosom. Med. 2013, 75, 171–177.

6.    Galobardes, B. Socioeconomic ineq ualities in health: Individual or area level; Does it matter?
      BMC Public Health 2012, 12, doi:10.1186/1471-2458-12-171.

7.    Kanter, R.; Caballero, B. Global gende r disparities in obesity: A review.    Adv. Nutr. 2012, 3,
      491–498.
8.    Kirby, J.B.; Liang, L.; Chen, H.J.; Wang, Y. Race, place, and obesity: The complex relationships

      among community racial/ethnic composition, indi       vidual race/ethnicity, and obesity in the
      United States. Amer. J. Public Health 2012  , 102, 1572–1578.

9.    Adler, N.E.; Rehkopf, D.H. U.S. Disparities in     health: Descriptions, causes, and mechanisms.
      Ann. Rev. Public Health 2008, 29, 235–252.

10.   Institute of Medicine. Unequal Treatment: Confronting Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Health
      Care; National Academy Press: Washington, DC, USA, 2002.
11.   Rappaport, S.M. Implications of the exposome for exposure science.         J. Expo. Sci. Environ.

      Epidemiol. 2011, 21, 5–9.
12.   Sankar, P.; Cho, M.K.; Condit, C.M.; Hunt, L.M.;      Koenig, B.; Marshall, P.; Soo-Jin Lee, S.;

      Spicer, P. Genetic research and health disparities. JAMA 2004, 291, 2985–2989.
13.   Shonkoff, J.P.; Garner, A.S.;   The Committee on Psychosocial As pects of Child and Family
      Health, Committee on Early Childhood, Adoption,          and Dependent Care, and Section on

      Developmental and Behavioral Pe diatrics. The lifelong effects of early childhood adversity and
      toxic stress. Pediatrics 2012, 129, 232–246.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2014, 11                                                    12886


14.   Hickens, M.T.; Gragg, R.; Hu, H. How cumulative ri sks warrant a shift in our approach to racial
      heath disparities: The case of lead, stress, and hypertension. Health Affair 2011, 30, 1895–1901.
15.   Hickens, M.T.; Gee, G.C.; Morenoff, J.; Connell, C.M.; Snow, R.C.; Hu, H. A novel look at

      racial health disparities: The interaction between social disadva ntage and environmental health.
      Amer. J. Public Health 2012, 102, 2344–2351.

16.   Sallis, J.F.; Owen, N. Ecological models. In  Health Behaviour and Health Education : Theory,
      Research, and Practice , 2nd ed.; Glanz, K.M., Lewis F., Rimer, B.K., Eds.; Jossey-Bass:
      San Francisco, CA, USA, 1997; pp. 403–424.

17.   Exposure Science in the 21st Century: A Vision and a Strategy     ; National Research Council:
      Washington, DC, USA, 2012; p. 12.

18.   Wild, C.P. The exposome: From concept to utility. Int. J. Epidemiol. 2012, 41, 24–32.
19.   Lioy, P.J.; Rappaport, S.M. Exposure science and the exposome: An opportunity for coherence in

      the environmental health sciences. Environ. Health Perspect. 2011, 119, 466–467.
20.   Lioy, P.J. Exposure science: A view of th e past and milestones for the future. Environ. Health
      Perspect. 2010, 118, 1081–1090.

21.   Gee, G.C.; Payne-Sturges, D.C. Environmental       health disparities: A framework integrating
      psychosocial and environmental concepts. Environ. Health Perspect. 2004, 112, 1645–1654.

22.   Wild, C.P. Complementing the genome with an        “exposome”: The outs tanding challenge of
      environmental exposuremeasurement in molecular epidemiology.Cancer Epidem. Biomarker. Prev.
      2005, 14, 1847–1850.

23.   Brunekreef, B. Exposure science, th e exposome, and public health.      Environ. Mol. Mutagen.
      2013, 54, 596–598.

24.   Betts, K.S. Characterizing exposomes:kec T       ools for measuring personal environmental
      exposures. Environ. Health Perspect. 2012, 120, 158–163.
25.   Birnbaum, L.S. NIEHS’s new strategic plan. Environ. Health Perspect. 2012, 120, 1640–1644.

26.   Fujishiro, K.; Diez-Roux, A.V.; Landsbergis, P.A.; Jenny, N.S.; Seeman, T. Current employment
      status, occupational category, occupational hazard exposure and job stress in relation to telomere

      length: The Multiethnic Studyof Atherosclerosis (MESA).Occup. Environ. Med   . 2013, 70, 552–560.
27.   National Research Council. Risk Assessment in the Federal Government: Managing the Process;

      National Academy Press: Washington, DC, USA, 1983.
28.   Rappaport, S.M.; Barupal, D.K.; Wishart, D.; Vineis, P.; Scalbert, A. The blood exposome and
      its role in discovering causes of death. Environ. Health Perspect. 2014, 122, 769–774.

29.   Rappaport, S.M.; Smith, M.T. Biomarke rs intersect with the exposome. Biomarkers 2012, 17,
      483–489.

30.   Vineis, P.; van Veldhoven, K.; Chadeau-Hyam, M.; Athersuch, T.J. Advancing the application of
      omics-based biomarkers in environmental epidemiology.       Environ. Mol. Mutagen . 2013, 54,
      461–467.

31.   Roy, A.; Georgopoulos, P.G.; Ouyang, M.; Freeman, N.; Lio        y, P.J. Environmental, dietary,
      demographic, and activity variables associated with biomarkers of exposure for benzene and lead.

      J. Expo. Anal. Environ. Epidemiol.003, 13, 417–426.
32.   Henderson, R.; Bechtold, W.; Maples, K. Biol ogical markers as measure of exposure. J. Expo.
      Anal. Environ. Epidemiol. 1992, 2, S1–S14.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2014, 11                                                     12887


33.   Goldstein, B.D.; Osofsky, H.J.; Lich tveld, M.Y. The gulf oil spill. N. Engl. J. Med. 2011, 364,
      1334–1348.
34.   Juarez, P. Sequencing the public health genome.     J. Health Care Poor Underserve.     2013, 24,

      S114–S120.
35.   Dunton, G.F.; Liao, Y.; Intille, S.; Spruijt-Metz, D.; Pentz, M. Physical and social contextual

      influences on children’s leisure-time physical  activity: An ecological momentary assessment
      study. J. Phys. Act Health 2011, 8, S103–S108.
36.   Birnbaum, L.S. Applying research to public health que stions: Biologically relevant exposures.

      Environ. Health Perspect. 2010, 118, doi:10.1289/ehp.1002015.
37.   Diez-Roux, A.V. Bringing context back into epidemiology: Variables and fallacies in multi-level

      analysis. Amer. J. Public Health 1998, 88, 216–222.
38.   Bronfenbrenner, U. Ecological systems theory. Ann. Child Develop. 1989, 6, 187–249.

39.   Eaton, W.; Harrison, G. Epidemiology and the social aspects of the human envirome. Curr. Opin.
      Psychiatry 1998, 11, 165–168.
40.   Teixeira, E.I.; Fischer, G.; van lthuizen, H.; van Dingeen, R.; Dentener, F.; Mills, G.; Walter, C.;

      Ewert, E. Limited potential of crop management for mitigating srface ozone impacts on global food
      supply.Atmos. Environ.2011, 45, 2569–2576.

41.   Von Bertalanffy, L.     General System Theory: Foundati       ons, Development, Applications ;
      George Braziller: New York, NY, USA, 1968.
42.   Bornstein, M.H. Sensitive periods in development: Structural characteristics and causal

      interpretations. Psychol. Bull. 1989, 105, 179–197.
43.   Al-Hamdan, M.Z.; Crosson,W.L.; Limaye, A.S.; Rickman, D.L.; Quattrochi, D.A.; Estes, M.G.;

      Qualters, J.R.; Sinclair, A.H.; Tolsma, D.D.; Adeniyi, K.A.;   et al. Methods for characterizing
      fine particulate matter using ground observations a nd satellite remote-sensing data: Potential use
      for environmental public health surveillance. J. Air Waste Manage. Assoc. 2009, 59, 865–881.

44.   Al-Hamdan, M.Z.; Crosson, W.L. ; Economou, S.A.; Estes, M.; Es tes, S.M.; Hemmi ngs, S.N.;
      Kent, S.T.; Puckett, M.; Qua    ttrochi, D.A.; Rickman, D.L.;     Wade, G.M.; McClure, L.A.

      Environmental public health applica tions using remotely sensed data.    Geocarto Int. 2014, 29,
      85–98.

45.   Crosson, W.L.; Al-Hamdan, M.; Hemmings, S.         N.; Wade, G.M. A daily merged MODIS
      Aqua-Terra land surface temperature data set for the conterminous United States. Remote Sens.
      Environ. 2012, 119, 315–324.

46.   Dolinoy, D.C.; Miranda, M.L. GIS modeling of        air toxics releases from TRI-reporting and
      non-TRI-reporting facilities: impacts for environmental justice. Environ. Health Perspect. 2004,

      112, 1717–1724.
47.   Pickering, K.; Scholes, S.; Bajekal, M.   Synthetic Estimation of Hea lthy Lifestyle Indicators:
      Stage 2 Report; National Centre for Social Research for the Department of Health, University of

      Canberra: Canberra, Australia, 2004.
48.   Bajekal, M.; Scholes, S.; Pi ckering, K.; Purdon, S. Synthetic Estimation of Healthy Lifestyle

      Indicators: Stage 1 Report ; National Centre for Social Research for the Department of Health,
      University of Canberra: Canberra, Australia, 2004.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2014, 11                                                    12888


49.   Subramanian, S.V. The relevance of multi-level statistical models for identifying causal
      neighborhood effects. Soc. Sci. Med. 2004, 58, 1961–1967.
50.   Subramanian, S.V.; Jones, K.; Duncan, C. Multi-Level Methods for Pub lic Health Research in

      Neighborhoods and Health; Oxford University Press: New York, NY, USA, 2003.
51.   Murray, E.T.; Ben-Shlomo, Y.; Tilling, K.; Sout     hall, H.; Aucott, P.; Kuh, D.; Hardy, R.

      Area deprivation across the life course and physical capability in midlife: Findings from the 1946
      British birth cohort. Amer. J. Epidemiol. 2013, 178, 441–450.
52.   Pickett, K.E.; Pearl, M. Multi-l evel analyses of neighborhood so cioeconomic context and health

      outcomes: A critical review. J. Epidemiol. Community Health 2001, 55, 111–122.
53. IMMemphis: Interactive Map of Health E             quity in Memphis, TN. Available online:

      http://www.immemphis.com (accessed on 5 August 2014).
54. Research Center on Health Disparities, E     quity, & the Exposome: Empowering communities

      through research. Available online: www.commun itymappingforhealthequity.org (accessed on
      5 August 2014).
55. Center for Disease Control a nd Prevention, National Environmen tal Public Hea lth Tracking

      Network. Available online: http://ephtracking.cdc.gov/showHome.action (access on 11 Novem-
      ber 2014).

56.   Environmental Protection Agency. EJView. Ava ilable online: http://epamap14.epa.gov/ejmap/
      entry.html (access on 5 November 2014).
57.   Community Commons. Available online: http           ://www.communitycommons.org/maps-data/

      (access on 11 November 2014).
58.   Opportunity Nation. Available online: http://opportunityindex.org (access on 5 August 2014).

59.   Healthy Communities Institute. Av ailable online: http://www.h ealthycommunitiesinstitute.com/
      (access on 9 December 2014).
60. Langston, M.A.; Levine, R.S.; Kilbourne, B.J.; Rogers, G.L. Jr.; Kershenbaum, A.K.; Baktash,

      S.H.; Coughlin, S.S.; Saxton, A.S.; Agboto, V.; Hood, D.B.; et al . Scalable combinatorial tools
      for health disparities research.. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2014, 11, 10419-10443.

61. Kershenbaum, A.D.; Langston, M.A., Levine, R.S. ; Saxton, A.M.; Oyana, T.J.; Kilbourne, B.J.;
      Rogers, G.L.; Gittner, L.S.; Baktash, S.H.; Matthews-Juarez, P.;   et al. Exploration of preterm

      birth rates using the public h ealth exposome database and com putational analysis methods.
      Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health, 2014, 11, 12346–12366.
62.   Patel, C.J.; Ioannidis, J.P.A. Placing epidemiol ogical results in the cont ext of multiplicity and

      typical correlations of exposures. J. Epidemiol. Community Health 2014, 68, 1096–1100.
63.   Wright, R.J.; Subramanian, S.V. Advancing a mu ltilevel framework for epidemiologic research

      on asthma disparities. Chest 2007, 132, S757–S769.
64.   Krewski, D.; Westphal, M.; Anderson, M.E.      ; Paoli, G.M.; Chiu, W.A.; Al-Aoughool, M.;
      Croteau, M.C.; Burgoon, L.D.; Cote, I. A framewor     k for the next generation of risk science.

      Environ. Health Perspect. 2014, 122, 796–805.
65.   Duval-Diop, D.; Curtis, A.; Clark, A. Enhanc     ing equity with public    participatory GIS in

      hurricane rebuilding: Faith based organiza tions, community mapping, and policy advocacy.
      Community Develop. J. 2010, 41, 32–49.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2014, 11                                                     12889


66.   Elwood, S. Negotiating knowledge production:            The everyday inclusions, exclusions,
      and contradictions of participatory GIS research. Prof. Geogr. 2006, 58, 197–208.
67.   Fisher, J.B.; Kelly, M.; Romm, J. Scales of environmental jus tice: Combining GIS and spatial

      analysis for air toxics in west Oakland, California. Health Place 2006, 12, 701–714.
68.   O’Fallon, L.R.; Dearry, A. Community-based par       ticipatory research as a tool to advance

      environmental health sciences. Environ. Health Perspect. 2002, 110, 155–159.
69.   Ghose, R.; Huxhold, W.E. Role of local contextual factors in building public participation GIS:
      The Milwaukee experience. Cartogr. Geogr. Inform. Sci. 2001, 28, 195–208.

70.   Pulido, L.; Sidawi, S.; Vos, R. An archaeology       of environmental racism in Los Angeles.
      Urban Geogr. 1996, 17, 419–439.

71.   Boer, J.T.; Pastor, M., Jr.; Sadd, J.L.; Snyde       r, L.D. Is there environmental racism?
      The demographics of hazardous waste in Los A ngeles County: Research on the environment.

      Soc. Sci. Quart. 1997, 78, 793–810.
72.   Bowen, W.M.; Salling, M.J.; Haynes, K.E.; Cy         ran, E.J. Toward environmental justice:
      Spatial equity in Ohio and Cleveland. Ann. Assn. Amer. Geogr. 1995, 85, 641–663.

73.   Braveman, P.; Krieger, N.; Lynch, J. Health in     equalities and social inequalities in health.
      Bull. WHO 2000, 78, 232–235.

74.   Bullard, R.D. Solid waste sites and the Black Houston community. Soc. Inq. 1983, 53, 273–288.
75.   Levine, R.S.; Rust, G.; Pisu, M.; Agboto, V.; Baltr us, P.; Briggs, N.C.; Zoorob, R.; Juarez, P.;
      Hull, P.C,; Goldzweig, I.;   et al . Increased Black-White disparities in mortality following

      life-saving innovations: A possi  ble consequence of United     States federal laws.    Amer. J.
      Public Health 2010, 100, 2176–2184.

76. Levine, R.S.; Kilbourne, B.E.; Baltrus, P.A.;     Williams-Brown, S.; Caplan, L.; Briggs, N.C.;
      Roberts, K.; Husaini, B.A.; Rust, G.E. Black-Wh ite disparities in elderly breast cancer mortality
      before and after implementation of medi care benefits for screening mammography.        J. Health

      Care Poor Underserve. 2008, 19, 103–134.
77.   Levine, R.S.; Briggs, N.C.; Kilbourne, B.S.    ; King, W.D.; Fry-Johnson, Y.; Baltrus, P.T.;

      Husaini, B.A.; Rust, G.S. Black-White mortality from HIV in the United States before and after
      introduction of highly active an tiretroviral therapy in 1996. Amer. J. Public Health 2007, 97,

      1884–1892.
78.   Andrews, J.O.; Tingen, M.S., Ja rriel, S.C.; Caleb, M.; Simmons , A.; Brunson, J.; Mueller, M.;
      Ahluwalia, J.S.; Newman, S.D.; Cox, M.J.; et al. Application of a CBPR framework to inform a

      multi-level tobacco cessation intervention in public housing neighborhoods.             Amer. J.
      Community Psychol. 2012, 50, 129–140.

79.   Minkler, M.; Wallerstein, N. Introduction to co    mmunity-based participatory research: New
      issues and emphases. In Community-Based Participatory Research for Health: From Process to
      Outcomes, 2nd ed.; Jossey-Bass: San Francisco, CA, USA, 2008.

80.   Israel, B.A.; Krieger, J.; Vlahov, D.; Ciske, S.J.; Foley, M.; Fortin, P . Challenges and facilitating
      factors in sustaining community-based participatory research partnerships: Lessons learned from

      the Detroit, New York City andSeattle Urban Research Centers.J. Urban Health 2006, 83, 1022–
      1040.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2014, 11                                                     12890


81.   Nation, M.; Bess, K.; Voight, A.; Perkins, D.D.; Juarez, P.D. Levels of community engagement
      in youth violence prevention: The role of power in sustaining successful university-community
      partnerships. Amer. J. Community Psychol. 2011, 48, 89–96.

82.   Minkler, M.; Vásquez, V.B.; Tajik, M.; Peterse n, D. Promoting environm ental justice through
      community-based participatory research: The ro     le of community and pa     rtnership capacity.

      Health Educ. Behav. 2008, 35, 119–137.
83.   Israel, B.A.; Schulz, A.J.; Parker, E.A.; Becker  , A.B. Review of community based research:
      Assessing partnership approaches to improve public health. Ann. Rev. Public Health 1998, 19,

      173–202.
84.   Hull, P.; Canedo, J.R.; Reece, M.C.; Lira, I.; Re  yes, F.; Garcia, E.; Juarez, P.; Williams, E.;

      Husaini, B.A. Using a participatory research process to address disproportionate Hispanic cancer
      burden. J. Health Care Poor Underserve. 2010, 21, 95–113.

85. Lichtveld, M.Y.; Arosemena, F.A. Resilience in the Aftermath of the Gulf of Mexico Oil Spill:
      An Academic-Community Partnership to Im            prove Health Education, Social Support,
      Access to Care, and Disaster Preparedness, In Pr oceedings of International Oil Spill Conference,

      Savannah, GA, USA, May 2014; pp. 156–169.
86. See, L.; Comber, A.; Salk, C.; Fritz, S.; van der Velde, M.; Perger, C.; Schill, C.; McCallum, I.;

      Kraxner, F.; Obersteiner, M. Comparing the qua lity of crowdsourced data contributed by expert
      and non-experts. PLoS One 2013, 8, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0069958.
87. Semple, H.; Qin, H.; Sasson, C. Development of        a Web GIS application for visualizing and

      analyzing community out of hospi tal cardiac arrest patterns. J. Public Health Inform . 2013, 5,
      212.

88.   Anderson, C.; Beazley, K.; Boxall, JJ.. Lessons for PPGIS from the aplication of a decision-support
      tool in the Nova Forest Alince of Nova Scotia, Canada. Environ. Manage. 2009, 90, 2081–2089.
89.   McHugh, R.; Roche, S.; Bédard, Y. Towards a            SOLAP-based public participation GIS.

      J. Environ. Manage. 2009, 90, 2041–2054.
90.   Nieuwenhuijsen, M.J.; Donaire-Gonzalez, D.; Fo        raster, M.; Martinez, D.; Cisneros, A.

      Using personal sensors to assess the   exposome and acute health effects.   Int. J. Environ. Res.
      Public Health 2014, 11, 7805–7819.

91.   Sieber, R. Public participation and geographic    information systems: A literature review and
      framework. Ann. Amer. Assn. Geogr. 2006, 96, 491–507.
92.   Juarez, P.D.; Jasney, L. Social netw   ork analysis and youth violence. In      Injury Research:

      Theories, Methods, and Approaches, 1st ed.; Li. G., Baker, S.P., Eds.; Springer: New York, NY,
      USA, 2012; Chapter 14, p. 750.

93.   Hassan, M.M. Arsenic poisoning in Bangladesh: spatial mitigation planning with GIS and public
      participation. Health Policy 2005, 74, 247–260.
94. Students Innovate to Address Gas Shortages         Following Hurricane Sa ndy. Available online:

      http://energy.gov/articles/students-innovate-address-gas-shortages-following-hurricane-sandy
      (access on 5 August 2014).

95.   Hurricane Sandy Gas Station Cris is Sees Solution From New Je        rsey High School Students.
      Available online: http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/1  1/01/hurricane-sandy-gas_n_2061305.html
      (access on 5 August 2014).
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2014, 11                                                      12891


96. Need Gas? Available online: http://mappler.net/gasstation/ (accessed on 5 August 2014).
97. Health Insurance Portability and Accountab       ility Act of 1996 (HIPAA). Available online:
      http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/administrative/statute/hipaastatutepdf.pdf (accessed on

      9 December 2014).
98.   National Center for Health Statitics. Public Health Service Act (42 U.S. Code. 242m(d)). Available

      online: http://webappa.cdc.gov/saweb/ncipc/dataRestric tion_inj.html (accesed on 9 August 2013).
99. HRSA Data Warehouse: Data Suppression – Birt          h and Infant Mortality Statistics. Available
      online: http://datawarehouse.hrsa.gov/data/aboutda ta/infantmortalitydatasupression.aspx (access

      on 25 August 2014).
100. Berger, P.L.; Luckmann, T.      Social Construction of Reality: A Treatise in the Sociology of

      Knowledge; Anchor Books: Garden City, NY, USA, 1966.

Appendix 1. Glossary


   “Big Data”. Structured and unstructured da ta sets that are so large and complex that it becomes
difficult to process them using personal computers or traditional data processing applications.
   Combinatorial Analysis . Identifies the number of permutati       ons and combinations in which

elements (e.g., data) can be arranged into sets. Th  e elements are usually finite in number, and the
arrangement is restricted by certain boundary cond    itions imposed by the particular problem under

investigation.
   Community-Based Participatory Research (CBPR)          . A research approach     that facilitates the
reciprocal transfer of knowledge , skills, capacity, and power between academic and community part-

ners.
   Community Mapping . A mapping technology that fosters pa           rticipatory planning, community

education, and cooperative organization.
   Crowdsourcing. The process of obtaining needed servi          ces, ideas, or content by soliciting
contributions from a large group of people, especially from an online community.

   Social/Ecological. Theoretical approach that considers so cial and ecological systems as resilient,
complex, and linked through feedback mechanisms.

   Exogenous. Developing from external factors.
   Endogenous. Growing or originating from within an organism.

   Exposome. The measure of all the exposures of an          individual in a lifetime and how those
exposures relate to health.
   Geographic Information Systems (GIS). A computer system designed to capture, store, manipulate,

analyze, manage, and present all types of spatial-temporal and geographical data.
   Graph Theory. A branch of mathematics concerned abou t how networks can be encoded and their

properties measured.
   Health Disparities . Inequities that exist when member     s of certain populatio n groups do not
benefit from the same health status as other groups.

   Health Impact Assessment    . A process for assessing the health     impacts of policies, plans and
projects in diverse communities     using quantitative and qualitative    data collection methods and

community participation.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2014, 11                                                  12892


   Life Cycle Approach. Considers growth and developmental issues unique to different periods of life.
   Paradigm. A new theoretical framework for looking at an issue.
   Public Health Exposome Approach. Uses a systems approach to consider the complex relationships

between environmental exposures, pe rsonal health outcomes, and populat ion level disparities across
the lifespan.

   Public Health Exposome Framework . Considers the relationships of exogenous and endogenous
exposures across multiple levels in four environmental domains: natural, built, social, and policy.
   Public Participatory GIS (PPGIS) . A specialized application of   community-based participatory

research that engages community participants in data collection by integrati ng smart phones, GIS,
and web technologies

   Smart Phones . A mobile phone that combines cellular      telephone, Internet access, camera and
camcorder, GPS, GIS, accelerometer, light meters and other emerging technologies.

   Spatial-Temporal. Incorporates qualities of both time and space.
   Systems Theory. The study of the complex and dynamic relationships and processes through which
members of a system act as a whole.


Appendix 2. PHE Data Repository Data Sources

Social


   1990 U.S. Census Summary Files
   2000 U.S. Census Summary Files
   2010 U.S. Census Summary Files

   ASU GeoDa Center for Geospatial Analysis
   Bureau of Labor Statistics Local Area Unemployment Statistics

   CMS Community Indicator
   DOL/BLS Metropolitan Area Occupational Employment statistics
   FIPS (Federal Information Processing Standards) Code

   Measures of America of the Social Science      Research Council, HD Index and Supplemental
Indicators by County and county equivalent, ALL Veterans by county and war

   National Center for Education Statistics
   Uniform Crime Reporting Program

   U.S. Census Current Population Survey
   U.S. Census American Fact Finder
   U.S. Census American Community Survey


Built

   American Housing Survey

   Area Health Resource File
   DHUD Affordable Housing-County
   DHUD Low Income Housing Tax Credit Property Data

   EPA Air Facility System (Aerometric Information Retrieval System-AIRS)
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2014, 11                                                12893


   EPA Facility Registry System
   Farm Program Atlas data by county
   HRSA geospatial Data warehouse

   USPO Vacancy Rates (residential and business)
   USDA US farmer’s market directory

   US DHHS, Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services, Provider of Services File

Natural

   Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,          National Environmental Public Health

Tracking Network
   EPA Air Quality System

   EPA Greenhouse gas reporting program
   ERS-USDA, State agency data on oil production

   EPA-SRSS County level radon
   EPA Toxics Release Inventory
   EPA Unregulated Contaminant Monitoring Rule (UCMR) program

   NASA (Remotely sensed data)
   USDA ERS Food Environmental Atlas

   USDA Economic Research Service, County Typology codes
   US Department of Homeland Security, Federal Emergency Management Agency
   USGS Data Gateway

   USGS National Water Information System Program

Policy


   Americans for Nonsmokers’ Rights
   DOL State Minimum Wage laws
   NHTSA States with Primary Seat Belt laws


Health

   Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System

   CDC Wonder
   Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services, Chronic Conditions Database: 2007–2011

   Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Community Indicators
   Child and Adolescent Health Measurement Initiative, National Survey of Children’s Health
   County Health Status Indicators

   Dartmouth Atlas of Health Care
   Fatality Analysis Reporting System (FARS)

   Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation Life Expectancy at Birth (in years)
   Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
   National Cancer Institute State Cancer profiles
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2014, 11                                                                      12894


    National Center for Health Statistics
    National Notifiable Disease Surveillance System

    National Vital Statistics System

    Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results Program (SEER)
    University of Wisconsin Population Health Institute County Health Rankings

    U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Community Health Status Indicators Report

    U.S. Department of Agriculture Supplemental Nutrition program
    U.S. Department of Transportation, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration


Appendix 3. Comparison of Data Analyses Methods


                               Table A1. Comparison of data analyses methods.

  Comparitive                                                                                Combinatorial/
  Information         Multi-Level Modeling                   Spatial-Temporal                Graph Theory
                      Individual and group level data with
                                                                                             Large-scale,
  Type of Data        a small number of variables/factors    Geo-coded raster and vector     heterogeneous,
                      used to model one (typically)          data                            often high-throughput
                      response variable
                      To account for the hierarchical and
                      correlation data structure (spatial    To analyze the spatial and      To detect subtle patterns,
                      and temporal),                         temporal relationships among    latent relationships, and
                                                             diseases, environments,
  Purpose             allowing for the simultaneous          population characteristics and  other useful information
                      examination of individual and          health disparities within or    hidden within vast
                      group-level factors. Can be                                            collections of sometimes-
                      used for prediction and                between defined populations     only modest correlations
                      statistical inference.                 and geographic areas
                      Mixed model analysis of variance or

                      regression analysis. The units of      Uses topological, geometric,
                      analysis are usually individuals (at a or geographic properties of     Employs graph theoretical
                      lower level) nested within                                             algorithms to pinpoint key
  Methods             contextual/aggregate units             data to generate a              network structure s and to
                      (at a higher level).                   geographically weighted         distill statistically robust
                      The dependent variable must be         regression model of a spatio-   inter-related clusters
                                                             temporal phenomenon
                      examined at the lowest level
                      of analysis.
                      (1) Quantifies the extent to which
                      health outcomes are clustered by
                      neighborhood and community             Can be used to examine the      Analyzes the entire search
                                                             relationships and changes in
                      grouping;                              patterns over time of           space, reduces
                      (2) quantifies how individual risk     environmental hazards,          dimensionality to
  Outcomes            factors vary from neighborhood to      socioeconomic status,           manageable levels, and
                      neighborhood; and (3) quantifies the                                   generates hypotheses
                      relative importance of individual,     socially vulnerable             suitable for testing with
                      neighborhood and societal level        neighborhoods, and health       orthogonal methods
                                                             disparities.
                      exposures in predicting individual
                      health outcomes.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2014, 11                                                                  12895



                                                 Table A1. Cont.

  Comparitive         Multi-Level Modeling                 Spatial-Temporal               Combinatorial/
  Information                                                                             Graph Theory
                                                                                          Unbiased and immune to
                      Using contextual factors beyond                                     preconception, scalable to
                      individual factors allows for a more Providing information on       datasets of immense size,
  Strengths           accurate identification of at-risk   spatial and temporal           exploits novel
                                                           relationships among
                      populations, which can be useful     variables.                     mathematical techniques
                      when planning health programs                                       to overcome
                                                                                          combinatorial bottlenecks
                      Group-level correlations can be
                      mistakenly                           Spatial dependency leads to    Sufficient data needed to
                      attributed to individual-level causes,patial autocorrelation which  compute correlation
                                                           violates standard statistical  structures, requires
  Limitations         since between-study                  techniques that assume         special knowledge for
                      variation is typically observational independence among             implementation, tuning
                      even when individual studies are     observations.                  and refinement
                      randomized experiments


© 2014 by the authors; licensee MDPI, Basel, Switz              erland. This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and conditions of                 the Creative Commons             Attribution license

(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).