                                            I

                                     ARTICLES


    TransformingParticipatoryScienceintoSocioecologicalPraxis

           Valuing Marginalized Environmental Knowledges in

         the Face of the Neoliberalization of Nature and Science


                            BrianJ.BurkeandNikHeynen





 䡲  ABSTRACT: Citizen science and sustainability science promise the more just and demo-
    cratic production of environmental knowledge and politics. In this review, we evaluate
    these participatory traditions within the context of (a) our theorization of how the
    valuation and devaluation of nature, knowledge, and people help to produce socio-
    ecological hierarchies, the uneven distribution of harms and benefi ts, and inequitable

    engagement within environmental politics, and (b) our analysis of how neoliberalism is
    reworking science and environmental governance. We find that citizen and sustainabil-
    ity science often fall short of their transformative potential because they do not directly
    confront the production of environmental injustice and political exclusion, including
    the knowledge hierarchies that shape how the environment is understood and acted
    upon, by whom, and for what ends. To deepen participatory practice, we propose a
    heterodox ethicopolitical praxis based in Gramscian, feminist, and postcolonial the-

    ory and describe how we have pursued transformative praxis in southern Appalachia
    through the Coweeta Listening Project.

 䡲  KEYWORDS:   citizen science, democratization, Gramsci, participation, science studies,
    sustainability science




                                    Introduction

For eight decades, scientists have used western North Carolina’s Coweeta Basin as a living lab-
oratory for research on forest hydrology, productivity, and the biogeochemistry of forests and

streams. Initiated in 1933 with the establishment of the USDA Forest Service Coweeta Experi-
mental Forest, this research program has expanded to include the University of Georgia (since
1968), the UNESCO Man and Biosphere Program (since 1976), and the Long Term Ecological
Research (LTER) Network (since 1980). Research at this site is emblematic of “Big Science”:
the research agenda depends on signifi cant resources to support large-scale environmental


EnvironmentandSociety:AdvancesinResearch 5 (2014): 7–27 © Berghahn Books
doi:10.3167/ares.2014.050102
8 䡲 Brian J. Burke and Nik Heynen



manipulation, experimentation, and observation. Until recently, people and social processes
have been largely absent from this research, conceptualized as agents of ecological disturbance,
impediments to precise experimental controls, or, more recently, as research subjects in need of

explanation and correction.
   Since 1994, however, the Coweeta LTER has expanded its focus from ecological processes in
the basin to socioecological dynamics in the broader region, a common trend across the envi-
ronmental sciences (Gragson and Grove 2006). Th is disciplinary and geographical expansion

has highlighted diverse ways of understanding and valuing science and nature, the margin-
alization of some of these within existing knowledge hierarchies, and entanglements between
ecological knowledge and broader political-e conomic dynamics. With these issues in mind,
we developed the Coweeta Listening Project (CLP), an action research collective that aims to

connect scientists and nonscientistsin more democratic and mutually beneficial relationships of
ecological knowledge production and use. In this article, we examine how interrelated systems
of knowledge and action relate to historically constituted patterns of power and how these may
be changed to facilitate more democratic and inclusive socioecological relations.

   We argue that new practices to promote public engagement in science are valuable but to
date insufficient, largely because they do not address underlying political-economic and cul-
tural inequalities. As Kleinman writes, “the re al obstacles to the democratization of science
are rooted in widespread social and economic inequality and an unexamined commitment to

expert authority” (1998: 133). We begin by describing how inequalities are produced through
the valuation of some natures, knowledges, and people and the devaluation of others. We then
examine the neoliberalization of nature and sc ience, which structures knowledge production
and environmental governance in a manner that further restricts popular participation. Th e

countervailing push for public participation in science—a cause championed by powerful sci-
entific institutions and grassroots groups—is therefore vital for ensuring that popular, marginal-
ized, and counterhegemonic knowledges and values are foundational to environmental politics
rather than appearing as mere aft erthoughts or backlashes. While there are many promising

strands of participatory science, we fi nd that the most popular varieties—citizen science and
sustainability science—often suffer from two shortcomings: (1) they inadequately challenge
existing knowledge hierarchies, which typically delegitimize nonscientists’ contributions to
knowledge and practice, and (2) they fail to address broader political-economic dynamics that

impinge on more just forms of environmental knowledge production and governance.
   The main goal of this article is to advance a new framework for participatory science that
challenges these systems of (de)valuation and thereby provide a basis for more democratic and
transformative socioecological praxis. Grounded in the theories and methods of Gramscian,

feminist, and postcolonial political ecologies and the popular education work of Paulo Freire
(1970) and Myles Horton (2003), this model for participatory science is explicitly committed to
combating marginalization and inequality. Our eff orts to enact this heterodox socioecological
praxis through the CLP reveal ongoing challenges to be overcome in the pursuit of democratic

environmental knowledge, governance, and values.



            Valuing and Devaluing Natures, Knowledges, and Peoples

It is now axiomatic that science is not the neutral, knowledge-seeking work of individuals, but
rather is a sociocultural process produced through particular relations of power. A necessary
intellectual and political task is therefore to understand what relations of force—what confi g-

uration of institutions, actors, economic and cultural infl uence, systems of environmental and
                                     Transforming Participatory Science into Socioecological Prax9s



social exploitation, and so forth—legitimize certain questions, methods, theories, and actors
for scientific knowledge and governance (Gramsci 1971; Harvey 2005; Roseberry 1994; Wolf

1982, 2001). Here, we focus in particular on how processes of valuing and devaluing nature,
knowledge, and people combine to transform socioecological governance in ways that unevenly
distribute harms and benefits and restrict possibilities for more equitable and democratic envi-
ronmental politics.

   To illustrate these processes, let us first examine the economic, cultural, and legal (de)valua-
tion of the environment and distinct ways of creating or extracting value from it.   Here we take
three common systems of valuation: (1) a corporate-oriented system that seeks private profi t,
the creation of new markets, and guaranteed returns for investments in research and develop-

ment; (2) a government-oriented system that manages environmental resources for economic
growth, tax revenue, and public services directed toward national and/or local priorities; and
(3) a household-oriented system that varies signifi cantly depending on the particular mix of
                                                            1
economic activities that comprise household livelihoods.      Eachofthesesystemsofenviron-
mental valuation requires and reinforces a particular way of knowing nature. The private, prof-
it-oriented model, for example, demands that territories be made legible through mapping,
that complex ecologies be reduced to discrete and quantifiable natural resources and ecosystem

services, and that use-values that might compete with lucrative exchange values be uncounted
or undervalued. By contrast, household systems of environmental valuation oft en hinge upon
intimate knowledge of complex ecologies accumulated through multigenerational experience
and continually refined through practice.

   The ability to apply knowledge via environmental governance and value extraction—and
thus to impose “one particular society/nature at the expense of others”—is often influenced by
rules of property ownership, control, and access (Nadasdy 2011: 132). Household knowledge
and livelihood systems typically combine the long-term exploitation of private property with

wage labor, across disparate geographical spaces, and may include the use of commons for graz-
ing, hunting, fishing, and the gathering of commodifi ed and noncommodified products (Bat-
terbury 2001; Ellis 2000; Gibson-Graham 1996: chap. 9; Kearney 1996; Netting 1993). Th     emost

“efficient” forms of private extraction, by contrast, demand enclosure and either private own-
ership or a guarantee of private appropriation of profits (Harvey 2005; Perelman 2000; Weaver
et al. 2012). Government-oriented value extraction can be achieved through many systems of
ownership, including public ownership, small-scale private ownership, or large-scale corporate

ownership. Ultimately, where the rule of law prevails, the government establishes the legal con-
ditions for which types of use and valuation are legitimate and under which conditions; this is
one reason scholars speak of neoliberalism not asa withdrawal of the state but as a realignment
of state processes through markets.

   Particular ways of valuing the environment become ascendant in part because their pro-
ponents have political and economic infl uence, but also because they resonate with systems
for (de)valuing other people, other knowledges, and other forms of valuation. Th is is evident,

for example, in knowledge and action around payments for ecosystem services (McAfee and
Shapiro 2010; Büscher et al. 2012), and in the way that racialized discourses were mobilized
to justify the creation of the Great Smoky Mountains National Park (Weaver 1996) and other
conservation areas (Brockington et al. 2010: chap. 6). One of our primary concerns is the way

that distinct and often competing systems of knowing and valuing nature reproduce inequality.
While the ecological impacts of household-based value extraction might limit others’ abilities to
extract their own value (a tragedy of the commons-type scenario), only the private or corporate
extraction of value inherently produces inequality, by removing public goods from the public

realm. Government-sponsored extraction of value produces inequality to the extent that it is
10 䡲  Brian J. Burke and Nik Heynen



(a) conducted through privatization and (b) tied to unequal or undemocratic redistribution of
revenues, as has been the case in Appalachia, where the royalties that companies pay to log pub-
lic lands have been far smaller than the tax revenues lost by making that land public.

   Second, let us consider the (de)valuation of knowledge, which occurs through the cultural
processes noted above as well as through economic and legal processes and is signifi         cantly
related to the valuation of nature. As we elaborate below, we are especially interested in the
neoliberalization of intellectual work within universities and government agencies, which priv-

ileges the creation of knowledge products that can be patented, privatized, and commodifiedin
order to generate monetary revenues, as well as the creation of knowledge that will generate new
markets (e.g., carbon markets or markets in ecosystem services). The (de facto and/or de jure)
enclosure and privatization of nature makes these types of knowledge valuable and “actionable”,

steering inquiry toward questions that advance possibilities for centralized, large-scale, corpo-
rate-oriented exchange values (e.g., board feet or carbon markets) rather than decentralized,
distributed, public- or household-oriented use-values (e.g., livelihood diversity, cultural repro-
duction, socioecological resilience).

   Knowledge hierarchies—both external to and internal to science—also aff           ect individual
career decisions. Young people are attracted to science because scientific professions are cultur-
ally esteemed and economically valuable, thanks in part to these political economies. Individual
scientists are drawn into market-friendly ways of knowing not because they favor centralized

and profit-oriented control over the environment (many do not, and indeed they oftendemon-
strate that such approaches are destructive), but rather because their professional environments
incentivize this type of work. Research shows that scientists consider public engagement to be
socially important but of little or no professional beneft—and, indeed, of possible harm—due to

lack of time and money, limited training in public engagement, institutional standards for pro-
motion and tenure, and/or concerns about status and prestige among peers (for examples from
a variety of countries, see Besley and Nisbet 2011; Jensen 2011; Kreimer et al. 2011; Mizumachi
et al. 2011; Poliakoffand Webb 2007; Royal Society 2006; Shanley and López 2009; however, it is

worth noting that studies disagree significantly about the relative contribution of each of these
factors to scientists’ positions on public engagement). Beyond these cultural and institutional
considerations, regulations play a key role in maintaining science’s status as the largely uncon-
tested, authoritative basis for environmental decision making—and for maintaining the special

authority of some types of science over others. Especially important are legal designations of
what scientific procedures and standards are necessary and sufficient for permitting, oversight,
legal and policy analysis, proof of environmental harm, and so forth.
   Importantly, the material inequalities created in the first moment of valuation partially shape

which social groups have substantive influence over the forms of knowledge that are ultimately
authorized. Of particular importance are differences in market power, political influence,influ-
ence on university research, and cultural celebration or stigmatization. Light and Higgs (1996)
describe this knowledge-politics-economy relati onship nicely in their discussion of ecologi-

cal restoration: the potential to achieve a participatory, egalitarian “politics in restoration” (by
negotiating questions of what gets restored, to what state, and according to whose criteria) is
significantly constrained by the “politics of restoration” (the macrolevel political-economic rela-
tions, whether capitalist, statist, or other, that restoration and restored ecosystems are meant to

support).
   This brings us to our fi nal consideration: the economic, cultural, and legal (de)valuation of
different classes of people. Scientific expertise, like all forms of expertise, is established largely
through the delegitimation of other ways of knowing and other knowers (Bensaude-Vincent

2009; Mikulak 2011; Summerson Carr 2010). Cultural and legal narratives that cast scientists
                                    Transforming Participatory Science into Socioecological Pra11s



as rational, objective, modern, voice-worthy, and legitimate also represent other knowers as
irrational, partial, backward, dismissible, and illegitimate. Th is hierarchy of knowledges and
knowers is so strong that it is often reinforced even in well-intentioned efforts to promote more

egalitarian dialogue (Kurath and Gisler 2009; Powell and Colin 2008; Taddei 2011). In short,
because expertise is relational, the celebration of science has antidemocratic consequences
whenever it occurs in a context not actively committed to egalitarian pluralism.
   Two examples illustrate the antidemocratic nature of knowledge hierarchies. First, cases of

environmental injustice show that the cultural andlegal valuation of particular forms of knowl-
edge and particular knowers shapes whose benefi ts matter and whose harms count (Checker
2005; Corburn 2005; Merrifield 1989). Once again, these knowledge hierarchies are oft en tied
to the production of material inequalities in the fi rst moment of environmental (de)valuation,

and they feed back to justify the inequitable allocation of environmental ownership and deci-
sion-making power. Second, we see similar hierarchies and blind spots among environmen-
talists. For example, a recent study in southern Appalachia (Jones et al. 2003) celebrates the
“greening of rural America” due to wealthy, educated urbanites migrating to rural areas and

becoming the new majority. This well-intentioned research, like similar popular narratives that
we hear in Appalachia, blinds us to possibilities for inclusive environmentalist strategies by pre-
judging mountain people as retrograde antienvironmentalists, assuming that urban environ-
mental values are the environmental values (and even building research methodologies around

this assumption), and thus casting mountaineers as harmful, provincial dimwits who need to
be replaced rather than as potential partners and stewards who enact their own unique form of
“commons environmentalism” (Newfont 2012).



                    The Socioecological Relations of Expert-Only
                     and Neoliberalized Knowledge Production


While the previous section outlined an analytical framework for the interrelated processes of
valuing and devaluing natures, knowledges, and people, here we elaborate on two aspects of the
social relations of knowledge production of late twentieth-century science: (1) a broadly social

hierarchy of knowledges that celebrated science’s exceptional status and permitted increasing
separation of the scientific enterprise from public institutions, and (2) a hierarchy of knowledge
internal to science that established “Big Science” as the most cutting-edge and prestigious form
of research. These external and internal hierarchies were achieved through cultural (de)valua-

tion, institutional realignment, policy change, and funding priorities, and they shaped how the
environment has been understood and acted upon, by whom, and for what ends.
   The isolation of scientists in the Coweeta Basin represents a history of scientifi c autonomy
during the postwar period (Guston 2000; Lengwiler 2008). From 1945 to the early 1970s, a

“social contract for science” permitted significant scientist self-governance in the determination
of research priorities, funding, and standards of evaluation. Scientific autonomy was established
partly because science’s perceived objectivity was culturally valued as the pinnacle of human
understanding, but it also depended on political struggles between elitists and populists within

federal research institutions and private industries’ work to secure a monopoly for the applied
science capacity that they developed during the war (Kleinman 1995). Many scientifi        c insti-
tutions were refocused on “basic” science disconnected from popular concerns, and applied
science was organized by the private sector for private profits. In exchange for their “blind del-

egation” of authority, the public was to receive trickle-down benefits such as medical advance-
ments, economic growth, and new technologies delivered primarily via private corporations.
12 䡲 Brian J. Burke and Nik Heynen



The separation of basic from applied research was slightly less pronounced in environmental
research (Goldman and Turner 2011), but ecology was also marked by growing professionaliza-
tion, specialization, autonomy, and privatization.

   Science’s status atop the knowledge hierarchy is clearly illustrated in both global and
national environmental politics, where ecological science shares the stage (sometimes com-
fortably, sometimes uneasily) with economics as the authorized foundation for understanding
and addressing environmental issues (Demeritt 2001; Levy and Egan 1998). As Jasanoffwrites,

“Science is one of the pillars on which modern environmentalism was founded” (1997: 581),
and it remains “environmentalism’s favorite battleground,” so dominant that environmental
debates are framed as “clashes over science” even when they really represent “deeper political
or cultural commitments” (1997: 582). In fact, scientific concerns often set the political agenda

even when significant knowledge gaps exist (Cornwell and Campbell 2012), and those gaps are
often obscured (and knowledge made to seem neutral) as research is applied through policy
and management. Luke (1996) argues that environmental science, particularly as it is taught
and enculturated in graduate programs and integrated into governing practices, invests expert

managers with a virtual monopoly on the power to interpret and control the environment.
Thus,certifi ed experts’ research in the highly controlled and unpopulated Coweeta Basin can
serve as a legitimate foundation for policy, while the experiential and embodied (but nonsta-
tistical) knowledge and concerns of the uncertified populace are devalued as unsystematic and

nonscientific.
   Autonomous science, expert-only knowledge production, and the concomitant devaluation
of other forms of knowledge have both epistemological and political eff     ects. Scientists’ near
monopoly on “knowledge” has exacerbated a failure to communicate with nonscientists that

“has hindered the progress of both effective science and effective policy” (Mikulak 2011: 201).
Conventional science is often not framed in ways that make it usable (Lemos and Morehouse
2005), its apparently value-free approach does not support decision making in a complex and
uncertain world (Funtowicz and Ravetz 1993), and its focus on generalizability oft en fails to

provide the detailed, place-based knowledge necessary for community-based action and adap-
tation (Wynne 1996). Furthermore, when expert-only ecological knowledge guides political
decisions about how landscapes will be transformed, for what ends, and according to what
cost-benefit logic, then knowledge hierarchies are li kely to reinforce cultural hierarchies and

material inequalities.
   We find three consequences of scientifi c autonomy particularly problematic. First, systems
for the production of knowledge are simultaneously systems for the production of ignorance
(Proctor and Schiebinger 2008; Kleinman and Suryanarayanan 2013). Limiting the pool of envi-

ronmental observations, ideas, and interpretations to those generated by professional scientists
creates a bottleneck in “cognitive diversity” that slows the advancement of knowledge, chan-
nels knowledge production toward particular ends, and leaves us ill-equipped to address future
socioenvironmental challenges (Harding 2000). Second, a by-product of cognitive narrowing is

that research questions tend to become narrowly ecological, losing their connection to broader
social and political processes and public concerns. While we have seen dramatically increased
calls for interdisciplinary and socioecological research in recent decades, the very need to make
those calls and to develop new methodologies and training regimes to link ecology and society

reveals how separate they have become. Finally, at the same time thatinquirybecomes less social
and political, knowledge and expertise become more political. This is perhaps most evident in
environmental justice struggles, which oft en revolve around legal proceedings that privilege
professional expertise and polluter-friendly “scientific” standards of causality while delegitimiz-
                                    Transforming Participatory Science into Socioecological Prax13



ing and erasing community knowledge and historical legacies of intersecting social-corporeal
oppression (Checker 2005; Corburn 2005; Merrifield 1989). Ironically, efforts to shore up scien-
tific authority by emphasizing that it is neutral,apolitical, and clearly distinguishable from “junk

science,” opinion, and other “inferior” forms of knowledge oft en backfire, deepening distrust
and restricting possibilities for negotiating truth claims and making decisions in a productive,
democratic, and science-informed but pluralistic fashion (Bocking 2004; Harding 2000; Jasa-
noff 1997). One of the most powerful political entanglements of ecological research arises from

neoliberal policies.
   Literature on the neoliberalization of nature and knowledge makes the stakes of expert-only
ecological science all the more clear. Questions of who decides how nature is valued, what parts
of nature are sold, how those parts are packaged, how much they are sold for, and who benefits

from these sales are all central to the integrity of nature and society, and yet the public is rarely
invited to address these questions. When the production of knowledge about nature advances
commodification and marketization, which tend to disadvantage the vast majority of children,
women, and men across the planet, developing approaches to bring those people into the pro-

duction ofthat knowledge seems all the more pressing.
   Since the 1970s neoliberal policies have allowed new forms of capitalism to interpenetrate
more and more dimensions of nature and to shape the ways nature is discursively framed, stra-
tegically organized, logistically dispersed, an d constantly re-created in line with free-market

processes. The mechanisms that have advanced neoliberal capitalism include changes to fi scal
policy, tax reform, and interest rates; increasingly free and unfettered trade relations; privatiza-
tion of state resources, services, and enterprises; deregulation of globalnancial institutions; and
upheavals in property rights. These changes in governance have accelerated ecological enclosure

and revolutionized ecological valuation, with severe socioecological ramifi cations (see Bakker
2005, 2010; Castree 2008a, 2008b, 2009; Heynen et al. 2007; McCarthy 2005; McCarthy and
Prudham 2004; Brockington and Duffy 2010; Weaver et al. 2012; West 2010).
   Grassroots agency to address these dynamics is constrained by the hierarchization and con-

trol of knowledge. Th e producers of embodied knowledge about neoliberal capitalism’s ramifi    ca-
tions are often ignored as politicians use formal science, economics, and ideology to implement
their vision. The marketization and commodification of knowledge about nature further disen-
franchises these publics.

   According to Lave and colleagues (2010), the neoliberalization of science, understood as
the move to produce knowledge useful for market-based endeavors, has largely been realized
through private investments and university-industry partnerships that have further weakened
the public orientation of scientifi c work. While these partnerships have always existed, Lave

and colleagues point to broader changes: “Neoliberalism reifies the primary function of an ideal
economy as a ‘marketplace of ideas’. The fundamental role of the market is not, according to
neoliberalism, the mere exchange of things, but rather the processing and conveyance of knowl-
edge or information” (2010: 662).

   Thus, in the neoliberal era the social relations of production tend toward increased socioeco-
logical exploitation while the social relations of knowledge production tend toward the dele-
gitimation of nonmarket analyses and nonexpert voices. Redefi ning nature and knowledge in
terms of market values fundamentally erodes their character as public goods and shaves away

possibilities for democratic, participatory engagement with both. Meaningful public engage-
ment with ecological science must, we believe, combat these interlinked processes of political
neoliberalism, environmental commodification, and knowledge privatization while expanding
spaces for democratic pluralism.
14 䡲 Brian J. Burke and Nik Heynen



          The Participatory Turn in Ecological Knowledge Production


Alongside the neoliberalization of nature and knowledge, however, grassroots groups, univer-
sities, government agencies, and other institutions have also promoted citizen participation in
environmental science and the production of more pluralistic forms of socioecological power/
knowledge. Calls for public participation in science have reached such a pitch that some have

declared this a “new social contract for science” (Demeritt 2001; Lubchenco 1998). On the sur-
face it seems as if good-faith efforts toward democratization will erode expert-only hegemony.
In fact, many of these calls come from major scientific institutions themselves, who believe that
increased public exposure to science will generate more support, more funding, and perhaps

more use of science in decision making (Bickford 2012; Pace et al. 2010; Pereira 2009). Because
participation has often failed to address and even exac erbated inequality and marginalization
(Cooke and Kothari 2001; Hickey and Mohan 2004), it is worth examining some of the histori-
cal context of this participatory turn and the precise ways that different participatory traditions

realign social relations.
   While citizen participation in science has a long history (Vetter 2011), the current move
toward participation dates to the late 1960s and early 1970s, when cases of scientifi c miscon-
duct, such as the failure of scientists to protect the public from problems such as bovine spon-

giform encephalopathy and environmental toxics, and increased awareness of technoscientifi c
complicity in environmental destruction, eroded the public faith sustaining the postwar social
contract for science. It seemed that good science did not guarantee progress, integrity, or pro-
ductivity (Guston 2000). Disenchanted with “the dominant technocratic orientation in envi-

ronmental policy making … [that created] a politics of expertise and counter-expertise among
industry and environmental scientists,” nonscientists generated a counterpolitics to bring socio-
cultural values, concerns for inequality, and p opular knowledge into decision making (Fischer
2000: 87–88). The participatory turn began with concern for the governance of science and its

applications, first through the incorporation of a broader range of scientifi c views and values
into policy debates about environmental planning, biotechnology, and nuclear energy develop-
ment. With time, this trend expanded to permit lay involvement in these deliberations as well as
popular challenges to scientific processes and epistemologies (Lengwiler 2008). In many cases,

though, these counterpolitics have sought merelyto make science-based decision making more
transparent rather than challenging professional science’s monopoly on authority and making it
substantively more democratic (Bocking 2004: 23).
   Some of the most transformative examples of public participation have been driven by grass-

roots activists and the citizen appropriation of science (Bonneuil et al. 2008; Callon and Rabe-
harisoa 2008; Corburn 2005; Kleinman 1998). Kleinman (1998) highlights some of the earliest
and most powerful cases of citizen mobilization around bioethics, popular epidemiology, and
community-based AIDS treatment research. Corburn (2005) provides excellent case studies for

how community science can be, and has been, mobilized and integrated with professional sci-
entific knowledge to pursue environmental health ju stice, as well as the ways that legal/juridi-
cal preferences for professional science impede this participatory knowledge production. And
PublicLab.org takes these methods to the Internet, creating a community and do-it-yourself

tools for environmental research and action. Th ese exemplify what we recommend in this
article—they challenge the hierarchy of knowledges and knowers and the value-laden political
economy of knowledge production and application—though we believe they can be enhanced
through more deliberate partnership between nonscientists and scientists.

   Inthisarticle,however,wefocusonthewaysthat            mainstream environmental science has
sought to foster greater participation in the production of knowledge. In what follows, we
                                    Transforming Participatory Science into Socioecological Praxi15



describe participatory practices within two increasingly popular realms: citizen science (CS)
and sustainability science (SS).
   Citizen science has generated significant interest because it promises to enhance data collec-

tion and science education through direct lay involvement with genuine research (Bonney et al.
2009; Henderson 2012; Miller-Rushing et al. 2012). If published research is an indicator, scien-
tists’ interest in CS is primarily as a data collection methodology. CS essentially crowdsources
data collection in order to permit long-term and spatially extensive analyses. Th e majority of

research articles on CS address questions of citizen competence and data quality—as measured
according to the norms of conventional scientific epistemologies—and reviews suggest that CS
is especially effective for finding rare organisms, tracking movement, detecting species declines,
addressing questions related to working landscapes and urban areas, and providing fi    ne-grained

data across a large spatial extent to complement aerial and satellite data (Dickinson et al. 2012).
   CS is also valued as a way to improve scientifi    c literacy, increase interest in science, and
create constituencies for scientist-defined issues (Alaback 2012; Bonney et al. 2009; Henderson
2012); however, there is a clear tension between this goal and those of grant writing, effi cient

data collection, timely analysis, and high-impact publication. Participants learn more when
they have the chance to develop their own questions on socioecological issues and work closely
with professionals to answer them (Bonney et al. 2009), but “substantial inquiry is unlikely to
develop in large-scale, contributory ecological monitoring projects unless it is encouraged and

intentionally designed for” (Dickinson et al. 2012: 295). Furthermore, criteria for success are
often defined according to conventional scientifi c indicators such as number of publications
generated (Freitag and Pfeffer 2013; Tulloch et al. 2013). Thus, CS rarely changes the hierarchy
of expertise by opening analysis and interpretation to historically marginalized perspectives

or giving citizens a substantive role as knowledge producers (see, e.g., Cornwell and Campbell
2011; Ellis and Waterton 2005). Even when CS programs have a significant educational mission,
they often simply reinforce scientific expertise and the devaluation of lay knowledge as lacking,
incomplete, or unsystematic. More often than not, CS seeks to make lay folks more like scien-

tists through cognitive, affective, and behavioral change, and ignores possibilities that scientists
might learn or that science may change (Jordan et al. 2012).
   Within the CS literature there are promising openings for more substantive change in the
social relations of knowledge production. Some scholars are considering the possibility that

lay volunteers might provide important context or novel experiential perspectives on research
(Alaback 2012), that participation in CS may lead to capacity building and, later, political mobi-
lization (Overdevest et al. 2004), and that the same technologies used to crowdsource data may
also put resource management decisions and associated data “in the hands of the people who

will be affected by the outcomes” (Dickinson et al 2012: 291; for promising examples, see Haklay
2012; Vitos et al. 2013). Furthermore, Cornwell and Campbell (2011) show that, even when CS
does not change knowledge hierarchies or contribute to coproduction, it can help democratize
environmental management. In their research on sea turtle monitoring and conservation, vol-

unteers’ long-term on-the-beach experiences and exposure to scientific debates allowed them to
contest state conservation practices and advocate alternatives rooted in their own worldviews,
values, and intellectual-embodied knowledge.
   In Pandya’s (2012) challenge to transform CS into participatory action research, we see real

promise for countering the historical exclusion of marginalized groups from science. Drawing
on participatory research traditions in health and development that are frequently overlooked
by participatory science scholars, Pandya (2012) suggests that a more democratic science can be
developed to advance socioecological knowledgeand resource management and to more evenly

distribute the benefits of such knowledge if community priorities guide the research, commu-
16 䡲  Brian J. Burke and Nik Heynen



nity members are active participants in every aspect of research, multiple forms of knowledge
are valued as legitimate sources of data, and scientifi c and educational teams are trained and
supported in participatory methods. To begin from community priorities is a challenge to sci-

entists, because these rarely correspo nd with disciplined knowledge and oft en include explic-
itly normative goals like community action and policy change. Perhaps most importantly,
this entire process requires an inversion and leveling of traditional hierarchies: “Th isrequires
placing scientists on an equal footing with other participants and fostering an environment of

co-learning. It does not mean omitting the science education of participants, but it does imply
that equal attention be given to the cultural education of the participating scientists” (Pandya
2012: 316–317; see also Button and Peterson 2009; Irwin 1995).
   In turn, the new field of sustainability science promises to address some of these shortcom-

ings of citizen science. SS has emerged in the last two decades as “a proactive, interdisciplinary,
transparent science” (Bäckstrand 2003: 36) that seeks to answer solution-oriented questions
to help decision makers define scientifically based limits for socioecological systems, decrease
vulnerability, promote resilience, and identify incentive structures that will guide people toward

more sustainable activities (Kates et al. 2001). One inspiration for the fi eld was the recogni-
tion that science and technology professionals were becoming “increasingly estranged from the
societal and political processes that were shaping the sustainability agenda” (Kates et al. 2001:
641). Thus, reversing this trend through participatory science is seen as “a prerequisite for more

sustainable development” (Pohl et al. 2010: 267), for more usable science, and for understanding
complex systems that no single perspective can ever fully grasp (Gallopín et al. 2001). However,
as Bäckstrand notes, typically “sustainability science does not address how … norms, institu-
tions and procedures in science have to change to enable broader participation” (2004: 37).

   Public engagement and pluralism thus seem central to SS, though they are enacted unevenly.
Many sustainability scholars remain convinced that ecologists have the right answers and simply
need to convey them more eff ectively to enable better decision making (Groffman et al. 2010),
but SS’s interest in understanding social and ecological systems has led to some new dialogical

events as well (Welp et al. 2006). These are largely predicated on a separation of scientifi c from
nonscientific knowledge producers and the extraction of lay information by scientists so that
scientists themselves can improve their own process, but the involvement of key stakeholders
in question development, the review and evaluation of models and results, and even the com-

munication of research findings is promising. Thus, while these reproduce a hierarchical value
system of knowledges, they make important contributions by “foster[ing] the art and practice of
thinking together” (Welp et al. 2006: 180).
   To their credit, sustainability scientists are increasingly aware of the need to develop more

deliberate processes for integrating scientifi c and public goals in the entire research process
(Shirk et al. 2012), and in ways that do not simply “use laypersons’ inputs in scientific research
(‘the primacy of science’) or provide classical decision support (‘the primacy of practice’)”
(Lang et al. 2012: 26). Remaining weaknesses of these approaches, however, are that they tend

to smooth over the productive disagreements that might emerge through transdisciplinary
engagement by continuing to strive for knowledge that is “science-based” rather than more in-
clusive (Shirk et al. 2012), and that they force consensus on defi nitions, problem framing, and
methods (Lang et al. 2012). Forcing consensus or a common language maintains the hegemony

of experts (Taddei 2011), and translating local vernaculars into scientifi    c abstractions oft en
makes it easier for subaltern knowledges and practices to “be controlled and consumed by pow-
erful outsiders” (West 2005: 633).
   Recognizing their limited success in performing genuine transdisciplinarity, some scholars

have called for a rethinking of SS and how it might incorporate social elements, but even these
                                    Transforming Participatory Science into Socioecological Prax17



authors often circle back to the same problems. For example, Spangenberg advocates an onto-
logical and epistemological reorientation of the researcher in order to decenter her/his own
analytical framework, work against professional socialization, recognize the partial nature of

all perspectives, and question basic scientific tenets or goals such as objectivity, value neutrality,
and predictability, but then suggests a research process that maintains scientists in “the decisive
role” in knowledge production (2011: 283). Similarly, Potschin and Haines-Young suggest trans-
forming ecology’s basic concepts to permit a more holistic view of socioecological processes, but

then argue that “the forces that drive [landscape change] need not concern us [in this model].
But in the real world they are the environmental, economic, cultural, and political factors that
trigger land cover change” (2006: 168). While we appreciate their desire to bound their analysis
in order to fit it into an article, we would object that those economic, cultural, political, and

environmental forces are exactly what need to be considered for any effort to radically rethink
either sustainability or transdisciplinarity.
   In summary, these two traditions of participatory science can certainly be seen as steps in
the right direction, but they fall short of the inclusive and antihierarchical knowledge systems

necessary for promoting democratic environmental governance and socioecological transfor-
mation. We therefore propose a response to these problems that simultaneously seeks changes
in the way science is done, the inequalities established within and through knowledge systems,
and broader social inequalities that affect environmental politics and the distribution of socio-

ecological burdens.



           Democratizing Science via Heterodox Ethicopolitical Praxis

We believe that heterodox ethicopolitical theory, working at the intersection of Gramscian, fem-
inist, and postcolonial political ecology and within the popular education approaches of Paulo
Freire (1970) and Myles Horton (2003), provides a basis for more genuinely democratic and

transformative ecological science and praxis. Th is approach seeks to build awareness that all
humans are capable of transforming their socioecological reality and to study the hegemonic
processes that impede them from doing so in order to enable grassroots, subaltern, and pub-
lic-oriented political ecologies. Th eoretical heterodoxy helps us imagine and prefi gure more

robust strategies of research and action to counteract the dystopian myths of neoliberal capi-
talism, ecological destruction, racism, and the multiple processes of (de)valuation that produce
inequality.
   Gramsci’s (1971) contribution to this heterodoxy is both analytical and political. Analyti-

cally, he highlights how different cultural political ecologies—different ways of knowing nature
and organizing society to extract value from it—are central to power, hegemony, and injustice.
Politically, he challenges knowledge producers to engage in a transformative praxis that pairs
intellectual work with political action. We argue that this praxis orientation is essential for

political ecology (see Mann 2009) and for ecological research that addresses uneven power
relations and engages diverse people as knowers, actors, and stewards. To be clear, this intellec-
tual-political praxis must confront the singular “conception of the world” maintained through
status quo ecological practice within particular power-laden conjunctures of history. It must

therefore confront the dominant social relations of knowledge production and regimes of val-
uation, value extraction, and resource control. We think that reorienting ecological knowledge
production as praxis-based coproduction off ers the most hopeful way to better enact science
for a “knowledge commons” (Puckett et al. 2012) that values effective and democratic environ-

mental governance.
18 䡲 Brian J. Burke and Nik Heynen



   Feminist and postcolonial scholars help us understand multiple and intersecting oppres-
sions, which produce multiple standpoints and ways of knowing and diverse political possibil-
ities. For example, Mollett and Faria incorporate insights from feminist geography and critical

race scholarship to argue for a postcolonial intersectional analysis that “‘mess[es] with gender
by ‘doing race’” (2013: 118). They argue that patriarchal and racial oppression function through
banal practices, limiting access to resources in everyday life. Knowledge about those resources
thus becomes central to antiracist and antipatriarchal struggles, as does whose knowledge and

values count in environmental governance (cf. Escobar 1998). Mollett and Faria (2013) push
political ecology to think beyond class and gen der by including ethnicity, kinship, caste, and
race as other formidable determinants of knowledge, access, power, and diff erence (see also
Asher 2009; Gezon 2006; Gururani 2002; Harris 2006; Nightingale 2011; Sultana 2009). We

believe that transformative participatory praxis must actively combat the delegitimization and
erasure of these diverse knowledges, values, and politics. Identifying and amplifying counter-
standpoints introduces into public debate alternatives to the neoliberal economistic discourses
that currently govern the production of nature and knowledge. It may therefore provoke new

ways of thinking, being, and doing rooted in ethicopolitical standards that do not privilege the
Western, white, male, heteronormative commodification of all that can be commodified.
   Postcolonial technoscience, as Goldman and Turner suggest, can support this ethicopolitical
praxis by drawing attention to knowledge systems beyond “Western science” and promoting

“multiple reconfigurations of knowledge, power, culture, capital, and science” (2011: 16–17).
Applying postcolonial theory to ecological science opens numerous corridors for increasing
participation in science and the public value of science-informed governance. At the basic level,
a commitment to pluralist knowledge and knowledge coproduced from multiple epistemic per-

spectives brings credibility and encourages greater buy-in from communities whose ways of
knowing and engaging nature have traditionally been marginalized, and in the process it makes
creative, alternative, and decommodifying forms of governance and control more likely.
   Other political ecologists and science and technology scholars have promoted democratized

ecological knowledge production (Agrawal 1995; Brosius et al. 2005; Corburn 2005; Goldman
2003; Murdoch and Clark 1994; Rocheleau 1991; Rocheleau et al. 1996), but we believe this
heterodox Gramscian perspective helps identify specifi c pathways for change. In our work
with the Coweeta Listening Project (CLP), we have sought to counter the marginalization and

devaluation of southern Appalachian people, their knowledge, and their role in environmental
governance. In the Freirian tradition, we have had to “make the road by walking”. It is there-
fore no surprise that we have not leveled knowledge hierarchies and overcome other obstacles
to coproduced environmental science and governance, but we think that our strategies off        er

valuable counterpoints to the participation experiments of citizen science and sustainability
science.
   One aspect of CLP work we would like to highlight is its connection to popular education,
which has been absent from discussions of science participation. Th e pedagogic traditions of

Paulo Freire (1970) and Myles Horton (2003) off er robust ways to operationalize heterodox
ethicopolitical efforts in place-based, historically contingent, political-ecological research. Pop-
ular education sees knowledge as emanating from both embodied action and refl     ection.Because
all people are actors, they are all knowledge holders. Popular education methods therefore pro-

mote cycles of learning: participants reflect on and systematize the knowledge that they already
possess, they seek out additional knowledge from other perspectives to deepen their analysis,
and they then put this refined knowledge into action as the end and the beginning of a new cycle
of learning. Crucially, all learning aims to build critical awareness of the politics surrounding

self-defined problems, thus rooting inquiry from the beginning in both community priorities
                                    Transforming Participatory Science into Socioecological Pra19s



and political-ecological contexts. These ideas suggest that reflexive science interested in demo-
cratic participation requires thick dialogic participation and long-term interaction.

   Through the CLP we have sought to establish the preconditions for popular education by
organizing “translational dialogues” within western North Carolina. Th ese dialogues are open
discussions hosted by community organizations, facilitated by us to prioritize place-based con-
cerns and knowledge, and enroll Coweeta LTER ecologists as both listeners and contributors.

Translational dialogues seek to highlight the value of place-based knowledge, alter traditional
expert-lay and lecturer-audience dynamics, and introduce socioenvironmental issues into the
public realm. Participants in these dialogues oft en struggle to abandon dominant knowledge
hierarchies and honestly consider the potential insights from multiple forms of knowledge.

However, we are encouraged that both scientistsand nonscientists have noted that these engage-
ments open their eyes to new questions and considerations, and that translational dialogues
have helped us build longer-term partnerships with two community groups studying possibil-

ities for local climate change adaptation, which has allowed us to advance further through the
cycle of learning and action.
   A second aspect of our work involves direct interventions in the social relations of knowledge
production, or what Gramsci would have termed a “war of position”. As coprincipal investigators

in the Coweeta LTER, we have begun writing community concerns and knowledge into LTER
research, giving residents of the region some representation (albeit imperfect and indirect) in
the research agenda. Notably, ecological models and methods seem to fit most easily with views
of humans as individual decision makers, and we have therefore struggled to integrate humans

into ecological research in a way that fully reflects social complexity, differentiation, and power.
However, we view these incipient collaborations as opportunities to build common ground with
ecological scientists and to develop more nuanced socioecological perspectives.
   Finally, building more democratic systems of      socioecological knowledge production and

governance does not involve erasing science, but merely reducing its privilege in order to
promote a more evenly dialogical process. Th us, all of these activities attempt to create part-
nerships grounded in solidarity between scientists and nonscientists, or what Gramsci might

have called a “historical bloc” for socioecological governance. We adopt this strategy not only
because “partnership” hopefully embodies democratic norms, and not only because integrated
knowledge counters the “cognitive bottleneck”, but also because, given the dominant cultural
and institutional hierarchy of knowledge, “the only legible form of counterknowledge is [often]

one of articulated knowledges” (Choy 2005: 5). As Heynen and colleagues (2007: 291) suggest:

      [W]e require utopian forms of environmental praxis to help us imagine alternative possi-
      bilities, emancipatory projects, and an end to social and environmental destruction at all
      scales. While communicating our skepticism toward the market enthusiasms so much a part

      of creeping neoliberal environmentalism, we require alliances with traditional members of
      the environmental community, and the green visions they carry and foment.



                                          Conclusion


Amid the challenges brought by the neoliberalization of nature and knowledge, much of the
knowledge produced through traditional scientific methods remains unused, inaccessible, and
sometimes even damaging to marginalized pe oples and their environments. But dialogically
producing ecological knowledge and governance requires signifi cant changes in expert and

nonexpert social relations and self-conceptions, as well as legal and institutional changes. In our
20 䡲 Brian J. Burke and Nik Heynen



work, we seek to reveal blind spots created by expert-only knowledge production and highlight
the value of popular knowledges in order to promote dialogical knowledge production that sup-
ports the communities that host scientific research as they work to protect themselves and their

landscapes. To do this in the face of models of science and environmental management that
seek private profit and economistic growth over emancipatory knowledge and sustainability
requires, we think, moving from “participation” to “praxis”.
   Transforming participatory science into socioecological praxis requires that we change value

systems related to both knowledge and nature. First, we argue that science is the production of
social relations and as such is shaped by power and in turn shapes power and inequality. These
power relations impede our ability to achieve genuinely sustainable and meaningful socioeco-
logical changes. Second, we recognize that the “participatory turn” seeks to change the socio-

ecological relations of knowledge production and therefore offers possibilities for transforming
power and inequality. However, when taking into account the (de)valuation of nature, knowl-
edge, and people and the neoliberalization of nature and knowledge, our analysis shows that this
participatory turn, in its status quo form, is limited.

   We believe a more transformative response to the problematic power relations of expert-only
knowledge production can be found through a Gramscian, feminist, and postcolonial ethicop-
olitical theory. Here, we advocate for a model of science that sees political change (in both the
institutional and sociocultural senses) as integral to the pursuit of knowledge and that creates

the conditions for dialogical knowledge production and democratic environmental governance.
There are already strains of this within citizen science and sustainability science, but they are
limited. Pursuing a form of democratized knowledge production that achieves the broadest
goals of socioecological transformation for sustainability will require that critical social analysis

be incorporated into the process of ecological science, and that scientists trust and join in more
extensive and explicit political mobilization, committing to work for change and reconciling
their professional value systems with value systems more conducive to egalitarian social forms
and sustainable ecological conditions.




 䡲  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors would like to thank the members of the Coweeta Listening Project—particularly
Jennifer L. Rice, Ted L. Gragson, and Seth Gustafson, who helped shape our ideas about ethi-

copolitical praxis and the history of science—and the residents of southwestern North Carolina,
who have collaborated in our efforts to produce more dialogical environmental science and
politics. Comments from the editors and two blind reviewers significantly enhanced this article.
This project was supported by a grant from the National Science Foundation to the Coweeta

Long Term Ecological Research (LTER) Program (DEB-0823293).



 䡲  BRIAN J.BURKE   is an assistant professor in the Goodnight Family Sustainable Development
    Department at Appalachian State University. From 2012 to 2014 he was a postdoctoral

    researcher with the Coweeta Listening Project. His research aims to support movements
    for social justice and environmental sustainability by examining their ethical visions and
    strategies and the challenges they face. Drawing on political economy and political ecology,
    he studies how material and sociocultural forces shape processes of social and socionatural

    change in specific contexts. His work has included projects on urban environmental activ-
                                     Transforming Participatory Science into Socioecological Praxi21



     ism on the US-Mexico border, rural cooperatives in Latin America, alternative economies
     in Colombia, and environmental knowledge.

     NIKHEYNEN    is a professor in the Department of Geography at the University of Georgia and
     director of the Coweeta Listening Project. His research utilizes a combined urban political

     ecology/urban political economy framework to investigate how economic, political, and
     cultural processes contribute to the production of material inequality and uneven urban
     environments. His three main research foci relate to the analysis of how social power rela-

     tionships, including class, race, and gender, are inscribed in the transformation of nature,
     and how in turn these processes contribute to interrelated and interdependent connections
     between nature, space, and social reproduction.




 䡲  NOTE

 1. Marxian scholarship, and to some degree all economic theory, has long focused on diverse ways of
     conceptualizing and extracting the value of nature. Th is was perhaps most obvious during debates
     about dependency theory, world systems, and the “articulation of modes of production” (see reviews

     by Foster-Carter 1977; Wolf 1982). Wolf offered a particularly sweeping theorization of how different
     modes of production—and their entanglements—involved “the changing relations of humankind
     to nature, the social relations into which humans enter in the course of transforming nature, and
     the consequent transformations of human symbolic capability” (1982: 21). More recently, Donham
     (1999) provided a masterfully detailed illustration of how diverse ways of extracting value interact

     in the same times and places, and shape one another in geographically and historically particular
     ways. The interactions of diverse ways of producing and extracting value have been brought to the
     fore again by scholars who emphasize that enclosure, dispossession, and economic destabilization
     remain central to capitalist expansion (Harvey 2005; Perelman 2000) and by those who suggest that

     postcapitalist and noncapitalist politics can be advanced by identifying and supporting those modes
     of value extraction that are more just and sustainable (Burke and Shear 2014; Gibson-Graham 2006;
     Nonini 2007). A significant contribution of recent scholarship is the analysis of how particular sys-
     tems of knowledge shape (and are sometimes intentionally cultivated in order to shape) these rela-
     tions among nature, society, and production (see, e.g., Escobar [1998] on biodiversity conservation;

     Scott [1998] on the statist worldview; Weaver and colleagues [2012] on new conceptualizations of
     time-space and resources that underpin neoliberalism; and West [2005] on intercultural and inter-
     organizational differences in nature-knowledge-society-values, as well as literature cited later in this
     article).




 䡲  REFERENCES

Agrawal, Arun. 1995. “Dismantling the Divide Between Indigenous and Scientific Knowledge.” Develop-
     ment and Change26, no. 3: 413–439.

Alaback, Paul. 2012. “A True Partnership.” Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment 10, no. 6: 284–284.
Asher, Kiran. 2009. Black and Green: Afro-Colombians, Development and Nature in the Pacific Lowlands.
     Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Bäckstrand, Karin. 2003. “Civic Science for Sustainability: Reframing the Role of Experts, Policy-Makers
     and Citizens in Environmental Governance.” Global Environmental Politics3, no. 4: 24–41.

Bakker, Karen. 2005. “Neoliberalizing Nature? Market Environmentalism in Water Supply in England
     and Wales.” Annals of the Association of American Geographers 95, no. 3: 542–565.
Bakker, Karen. 2010. “Debating Green Neoliberalism: The Limits of ‘Neoliberal Natures’.” Progress in
     Human Geography 34, no. 6: 715–735.
22  䡲 Brian J. Burke and Nik Heynen



Batterbury, Simon. 2001. “Landscapes of Diversity: A Local Political Ecology of Livelihood Diversifica-
     tion in South-Western Niger.” Ecumene 8, no. 4: 437–464.
Bensaude-Vincent, Bernadette. 2009. “A Historical Perspective on Science and Its ‘Others’.” ISIS: Journal

     of the History of Science in Society100, no. 2: 359–368.
Besley, John C., and Matthew Nisbet. 2011. “How Scientists View the Public, the Media and the Political
     Process.” Public Understanding of Science22, no. 6: 644–659.
Bickford, David, Mary Rose C. Posa, Lan Qie, Campos-Arceiz Ahimsa, and P. Kudavidanage Enoka.

     2012. “Science Communication for Biodiversity Conservation.” Biological Conservation 151: 74–76.
Bocking, Stephen. 2004. Nature’s Experts: Science, Politics, and the Environment.New Brunswick, NJ:
     Rutgers University Press.

Bonneuil, Cristophe, Pierre-Benoit Joly, and Claire Marris. 2008. “Disentrenching Experiment: TheCon-
     struction of GM-Crop Field Trials as a Social Problem.” Science Technology & Human Values33, no.
     2: 201–229.
Bonney, Rick, Heidi Ballard, Rebecca Jordan, Ellen McCallie, Tina Phillips, Jennifer Shirk, and Candie

     C. Wilderman. 2009. Public Participation in Scientific Research: Defining the Field and Assessing Its
     Potential for Informal Science Education.Washington, DC: Center for Advancement of Informal
     Science Education.
Brockington, Daniel, and Rosaleen Duffy. 2010. “Capitalism and Conservation: The Production and

     Reproduction of Biodiversity Conservation.”Antipode 42, no. 3: 469–484.
Brockington, Dan, Rosaleen Duffy, and Jim Igoe. 2010. Nature Unbound: Conservation, Capitalism and
     the Future of Protected Areas. London: Earthscan.

Brosius, J. Peter, Anna Lowenhaupt Tsing, and Charles Zerner, eds. 2005. Communities and Conserva-
     tion: Histories and Politics of Community-Based Natural Resource ManagementW    . alnut Creek, CA:
     AltaMira Press.
Burke, Brian J., and Boone Shear, eds. 2014. “Non-Capitalist Political Ecologies.” Special sectionJournal

     of Political Ecology21, nos. 6–11: 127–221. http://jpe.library.arizona.edu/Volume21/Volume_21.html
     (accessed 10 June 2014).
Büscher, Bram, Sian Sullivan, Katja Neves, Jim Igoe, and Dan Brockington. 2012. “Towards a Synthe-

     sized Critique of Neoliberal Biodiversity Conservation.” Capitalism Nature Socialism23, no. 2: 4–30.
Button, Gregory V., and Kristina Peterson. 2009. “Participatory Action Research: Community Partner-
     ship with Social and Physical Scientists.” Pp. 209–217 in Anthropology and Climate Change: From
     Encounters to Actions,ed. Susan A. Crate and Mark Nuttall. Walnut Creek, CA: Left Coast Press.

Callon, Michel, and Vololona Rabeharisoa. 2008. “The Growing Engagement of Emergent Concerned
     Groups in Political and Economic Life: Lessons from the French Association of Neuromuscular
     Disease Patients.” Science, Technology & Human Values33, no. 2: 230–261.
Castree, Noel. 2008a. “Neo-liberalising Nature I: The Logics of De- and Re-regulation.” Environment and

     Planning A40, no. 1: 131–152.
Castree, Noel. 2008b. “Neo-liberalising Nature II: Processes, Outcomes and Effects.” Environment and
     Planning A40, no. 1: 153–173.

Castree, Noel. 2009. “Researching Neoliberal Environmental Governance: A Reply to Karen Bakker.”
     Environment and Planning A 41, no. 8: 1788–1794.
Checker, Melissa. 2005. Polluted Promises: Environmental Racism and the Search for Justice in a Southern
     Town. New York: New York University Press.

Choy, Timothy K. 2005. “Articulated Knowledges: Enviromental Forms after Universality’s Demise.”
     American Anthropologist107, no. 1: 5–18.
Cooke, Bill, and Uma Kothari, eds. 2001. Participation: The New Tyranny? New York: Zed Books.

Corburn, Jason. 2005. Street Science: Community Knowledge and Environmental Health Justice. Cam-
     bridge, MA: MIT Press.
Cornwell, Myriah L., and Lisa M. Campbell. 2012. “Co-Producing Conservation and Knowledge: Citizen-
     Based Sea Turtle Monitoring in North Carolina, USA.” Social Studies of Science 42, no. 1: 101–120.

Demeritt, David. 2001. “The Construction of Global Warming and the Politics of Science.” Annals of the
     Association of American Geographers91, no. 2: 307–337.
                                       Transforming Participatory Science into Socioecological Praxis 䡲 23



Dickinson, Janis L., Jennifer Shirk, David Bonter, Rick Bonney, Rhiannon L. Crain, Jason Martin, Tina
     Phillips, and Karen Purcell. 2012. “The Current State of Citizen Science as a Tool for Ecological
     Research and Public Engagement.” Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment 10, no. 6: 291–297.

Donham, Donald L. 1999. History, Power, Ideology: Central Issues in Marxism and AnthropologyB     . erke-
     ley: University of California Press.
Ellis, Frank. 2000.Rural Livelihoods and Diversity in Developing CountriesO. xford: Oxford University Press.
Ellis, Rebecca, and Claire Waterton. 2005. “Caught Between the Cartographic and the Ethnographic

     Imagination: The Whereabouts of Amateurs, Professionals, and Nature in Knowing Biodiversity.”
     Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 23, no. 5: 673–693.
Escobar, Arturo. 1998. “Whose Knowledge, Whose Nature? Biodiversity, Conservation, and the Political

     Ecology of Social Movements.” Journal of Political Ecology 5, no. 1: 53–82. http://jpe.library.arizona
     .edu/volume_5/3escobar.pdf (accessed 10 June 2014).
Fischer, Frank. 2000. Citizens, Experts, and the Environment: The Politics of Local Knowledge. Durham,
     NC: Duke University Press.

Foster-Carter, Aidan. 1977. “Can We Articulate Articulation?” New LeftReview 107: 47–77.
Freire, Paulo. 1970. Pedagogy of the Oppressed. Trans. Myra Bergman Ramos. New York: Continuum.
Freitag, Amy, and Max J. Pfeffer. 2013. “Process, Not Product: Investigating Recommendations for
     Improving Citizen Science ‘Success’.” PLOS One 8, no. 5: 1–5.

Funtowicz, Silvio O., and Jerome R. Ravetz. 1993. “Science for the Post-Normal Age.” Futures25, no. 7:
     739–755.
Gallopín, Gilberto C., Silvio O. Funtowicz, Martin O’Connor, and Jerry Ravetz. 2001. “Science for the

     Twenty-First Century: From Social Contract to the Science Core.” International Social Science Jour-
     nal 53, no. 2: 219–229.
Gezon, Lisa L. 2006. Global Visions, Local Landscapes: A Political Ecology of Conservation, Conflict, and
     Control in Northern Madagascar. Lanham, MD: Altamira Press.

Gibson-Graham, J. K. 1996. The End of Capitalism (as We Knew It): A Feminist Critique of Political Econ-
     omy. Oxford: Blackwell.
Goldman, Mara. 2003. “Partitioned Nature, Privileged Knowledge: Community-Based Conservation in

     Tanzania.” Development and Change 34, no. 5: 833–862.
Goldman, Mara J., and Matthew D. Turner. 2011. “Introduction.” Pp. 1–29 in Knowing Nature: Conversa-
     tions at the Intersection of Political Ecology and Science Studies,ed. Mara J. Goldman, Paul Nadasdy,
     and Matthew D. Turner. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Gragson, Theodore L., and Morgan Grove. 2006. “Social Science in the Context of the Long Term Eco-
     logical Research Program.” Society & Natural Resources 19, no. 2: 93–100.
Gramsci, Antonio. 1971. Selections from the Prison Notebooks. Ed. Quintin Hoare and GeoffreyNowell
     Smith. London: Lawrence and Wishart.

Groffman, Peter M., Cathlyn Stylinski, Matthew C. Nisbet, Carlos M. Duarte, Rebecca Jordan, Amy
     Burgin, M. Andrea Previtali, and James Coloso. 2010. “Restarting the Conversation: Challenges
     at the Interface Between Ecology and Society.” Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment 8, no. 6:

     284–291.
Gururani, Shubhra. 2002. “Forests of Pleasure and Pain: Gendered Practices of Labor and Livelihood
     in the Forests of the Kumaon Himalayas, India.” Gender, Place andCulture: A Journal of Feminist
     Geography 9, no. 3: 229–243.

Guston, David H. 2000. Between Politics and Science: Assuring the Integrity and Productivity of Research.
     Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Haklay, Muki. 2012. “Citizen Science and Volunteered Geographic Information: Overview and Typology

     of Participation.” Pp. 105–122 in Crowdsourcing Geographic Knowledge: Volunteered Geographic
     Information(VGI) in Theory and Practice,ed. Daniel Sui, Sarah Elwood, and Michael Goodchild.
     Berlin: Springer.
Harding, Sandra. 2000. “Should Philosophies of Science Encode Democratic Ideals?” Pp. 121–138 in

     Science, Technology, and Democracy,ed. Daniel L. Kleinman. Albany: State University of New York
     Press.
24  䡲 Brian J. Burke and Nik Heynen



Harris, Leila. 2006. “Irrigation, Gender, and Social Geographies of the Changing Waterscapes of South-
     eastern Anatolia.” Environmental and Planning D: Society and Space24, no. 2: 187–213.
Harvey, David. 2005. A Brief History of Neoliberalism.Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Henderson, Sandra. 2012. “Citizen Science Comes of Age.” Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment 10,
     no. 6: 283–283.
Heynen, Nik, James McCarthy, W. Scott Prudham, and Paul Robbins. 2007. Neoliberal Environments:
     False Promises and Unnatural Consequences. London: Routledge.

Hickey, Samuel, and Giles Mohan, eds. 2004. Participation: From Tyranny to Transformation?New York:
     Zed Books.
Horton, Myles. 2003. The Myles Horton Reader: Education for Social Change.Ed. Dale Jacobs. Knoxville:

     University of Tennessee Press.
Irwin, Alan. 1995. Citizen Science: A Study of People, Expertise and Sustainable Development.London:
     Routledge.
Jasanoff, Sheila. 1997. “NGOs and the Environment: From Knowledge to Action.” Third World Quarterly

     18, no. 3: 579–594.
Jensen, Pablo. 2011. “A Statistical Picture of Popularization Activities and Their Evolutions in France.”
     Public Understanding of Science20, no. 1: 26–36.
Jones, Robert Emmet, J. Mark Fly, James Telley, and H. Ken Cordell. 2003. “Green Migration into Rural

     America: The New Frontier of Environmentalism?” Society & Natural Resources 16, no. 3: 221–
     238.
Jordan, Rebecca C., Heidi L. Ballard, and Tina B. Phillips. 2012. “Key Issues and New Approaches for

     Evaluating Citizen-Science Learning Outcomes.” Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment 10, no. 6:
     307–309.
Kates, Robert W., William C. Clark, Robert Corell, J. Michael Hall, Carlo Jaeger, Ian Lowe, James J.
     McCarthy, et al. 2001. “Sustainability Science.” Science 292, no. 5117: 641–642.

Kearney, Michael. 1996. Reconceptualizing the Peasantry: Anthropology in Global Perspective.Boulder,
     CO: Westview Press.
Kleinman, Daniel L. 1995. Politics on the Endless Frontier: Postwar Research Policy in the United States.

     Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Kleinman, Daniel L. 1998. “Beyond the Science Wars: Contemplating the Democratization of Science.”
     Politics and the Life Sciences 17, no. 2: 133–145.
Kleinman, Daniel Lee, and Sainath Suryanarayanan. 2013. “Dying Bees and the Social Production of

     Ignorance.” Science, Technology & Human Values 38, no. 4: 492–517.
Kreimer, Pablo, Luciano Levin, and Pablo Jensen. 2011. “Popularization by Argentine Researchers:
     The Activities and Motivations of CONICET Scientists.” Public Understanding of Science20, no. 1:
     37–47.

Kurath, Monika, and Priska Gisler. 2009. “Informing, Involving or Engaging? Science Communica-
     tion in the Ages of Atom-, Bio- and Nanotechnology.” Public Understanding of Science18, no. 5:
     559–573.

Lang, Daniel J., Arnim Wiek, Matthias Bergmann, Michael Stauffacher, Pim Martens, Peter Moll, Mark
     Swilling, and Christopher J. Thomas. 2012. “Transdisciplinary Research in Sustainability Science:
     Practice, Principles, and Challenges.” Sustainability Science7, suppl. 1: 25–43.
Lave, Rebecca, Philip Mirowski, and Samuel Randalls. 2010. “Introduction: STS and Neoliberal Science.”

     Social Studies of Science40, no. 5: 659–675.
Lemos, Maria Carmen, and Barbara J. Morehouse. 2005. “The Co-Production of Science and Policy in
     Integrated Climate Assessments.” Global Environmental Change 15, no. 1: 57–68.

Lengwiler, Martin. 2008. “Participatory Approaches in Science and Technology: Historical Origins and
     Current Practices in Critical Perspective.” Science Technology & Human Values33, no. 2: 186–200.
Levy, David L., and Daniel Egan. 1998. “Capital Contests: National and Transnational Channels of Cor-
     porate Influence on the Climate Change Negotiations.” Politics & Society 26, no. 3: 337–361.

Light, Andrew, and Eric S. Higgs. 1996. “The Politics of Ecological Restoration.” Environmental Ethics18:
     227–247.
                                       Transforming Participatory Science into Socioecological Praxis䡲  25



Lubchenco, Jane. 1998. “Entering the Century of the Environment: A New Social Contract for Science.”
     Science 279, no. 5350: 491–497.
Luke, Timothy W. 1996. “Generating Green Governmentality: A Cultural Critique of Environmental

     Studies as a Power/Knowledge Formation.” http://www.cddc.vt.edu/tim/tims/Tim514a.PDF
     (accessed 15 November 2013).
Mann, Geoff. 2009. “Should Political Ecology Be Marxist? A Case for Gramsci’s Historical Materialism.”
     Geoforum40, no. 3: 335–344.

McAfee, Kathleen, and Elizabeth N. Shapiro. 2010. “Payments for Ecosystem Services in Mexico: Nature,
     Neoliberalism, Social Movements, and the State.” Annals of the Association of American Geographers
     100, no. 3: 579–599.

McCarthy, James. 2005. “Devolution in the Woods: Community Forestry as Hybrid Neoliberalism.”
     Environment and Planning A 37, no. 6: 99–1014.
McCarthy, James, and W. Scott Prudham. 2004. “Neoliberal Nature and the Nature of Neoliberalism.”
     Geoforum35, no. 3: 275–283.

Merrifield, Juliet. 1989. “Putting the Scientists in Their Place: Participatory Research in Environmental
     and Occupational Health.” Pp. 265–296 in Highlander Research and Education Center: An Approach
     to Education Presented through a Collection of Writings.New Market, TN: Highlander Research and
     Education Center.

Mikulak, Anna. 2011. “Mismatches between ‘Scientific’ and ‘Non-scientific’ Ways of Knowing and Their
     Contributions to Public Understanding of Science.”Integrative Psychological & Behavioral Science
     45, no. 2: 201–215.

Miller-Rushing Abraham, Richard Primack, and Rick Bonney. 2012. “The History of Public Participation
     in Ecological Research.” Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment 10, no. 6: 285–290.
Mizumachi, Eri, Kentaro Matsuda, Kei Kano, Masahiro Kawakami and Kazuto Kato. 2011. “Scientists’
     Attitudes toward a Dialogue with the Public: A Study Using ‘Science Cafes’.” JCOM: Journal of Sci-

     ence Communication10, no. 4: 1–11.
Mollett, Sharlene, and Caroline Faria. 2013. “Messing with Gender in Feminist Political Ecology.” Geo-
     forum45: 116–125.

Murdoch, Judy, and Jonathan Clark. 1994. “Sustainable Knowledge.” Geoforum25, no. 2: 115–32.
Nadasdy, Paul. 2011. “Application of Environmental Knowledge: The Politics of Constructing Society/
     Nature.” Pp. 129–134 in Knowing Nature: Conversations at the Intersection of Political Ecology and
     Science Studies, ed. Mara J. Goldman, Paul Nadasdy, and Matthew D. Turner. Chicago: University of

     Chicago Press.
Netting, Robert McC. 1993. Smallholders, Householders: Farm Families and the Ecology of Intensive, Sus-
     tainable Agriculture.Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Newfont, Kathryn. 2012. Blue Ridge Commons: Environmental Activism and Forest History in Western

     North Carolina. Athens: University of Georgia Press.
Nightingale, Andrea. 2011. “Bounding Difference: Intersectionality and the Material Production of Gen-
     der, Caste, Class and Environment in Nepal.” Geoforum42, no. 2: 153–162.

Nonini, Donald M., ed. 2007. The Global Idea of “TheCommons” . New York: Berghahn Books.
Overdevest, Christine, Cailin Huyck Orr, and Kristine Stepenuck. 2004. “Volunteer Stream Monitoring
     and Local Participation in Natural Resource Issues.” Research in Human Ecology 11, no. 2: 177–185.
Pace, Michael L., Stephanie E. Hampton, Karin E. Limburg, Elena M. Bennett, Elizabeth M. Cook,

     Ann E. Davis, J. Morgan Grove, et al. 2010. “Communicating with the Public: Opportunities and
     Rewards for Individual Ecologists.” Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment 8, no. 6: 292–298.
Pandya, Rajul E. 2012. “A Framework for Engaging Diverse Communities in Citizen Science in the Us.”

     Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment 10, no. 6: 314–317.
Pereira, Angela Guimarães, Frank Raes, Tiago De Sousa Pedrosa, Paulo Rosa, Søsser Brodersen, Michael
     Søgaard Jørgensen, Francisco Ferreira, Xavier Querol, and John Rea. 2009. “Atmospheric Composi-
     tion Change Research: Time to Go Post-Normal?” Atmospheric Environment43, no. 33: 5423–5432.

Perelman, Michael. 2000. The Invention of Capitalism: Classical Political Economy and the Secret History
     of Primitive Accumulation.Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
26  䡲 Brian J. Burke and Nik Heynen



Pohl, Christian, Stephan Rist, Anne Zimmermann, Patricia Fry, Ghana S. Gurung, Flurina Schneider,
     Chinwe Ifejika Speranza, et al. 2010. “Researchers’ Roles in Knowledge Co-production: Experience
     from Sustainability Research in Kenya, Switzerland, Bolivia and Nepal.” Science and Public Policy37,

     no. 4: 267–281.
Poliakoff, Ellen, and Thomas L. Webb. 2007. “What Factors Predict Scientists’ Intentions to Participate in
     Public Engagement of Science Activities?”Science Communication29, no. 2: 242–263.
Potschin, Marion, and Roy Haines-Young. 2006. “‘Rio+10’, Sustainability Science and Landscape Ecol-

     ogy.” Landscape and Urban Planning 75, nos. 3–4: 162–174.
Powell, Maria C., and Mathilde Colin. 2008. “Meaningful Citizen Engagement in Science and Technol-
     ogy: What Would It Really Take?” Science Communication30, no. 1: 126–136.

Proctor, Robert N., and Londa Schiebinger. 2008. Agnotology: The Making and Unmaking of Ignorance.
     Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Puckett, Anita, Elizabeth Fine, Mary Hufford, Ann Kingsolver, and Betsy Taylor. 2012. “Who Knows?
     Who Tells? Creating a Knowledge Commons.” Pp. 239–251 in Transforming Places: Lessons from

     Appalachia, ed. Stephen L. Fisher and Barbara E. Smith. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
Rocheleau, Diane. 1991. “Gender, Ecology and the Science of Survival: Stories and Lessons from Kenya.”
     Agriculture and Human Values 8, no. 1: 156–164.
Rocheleau, Diane, Barbara Thomas-Slayter, and Esther Wangari. 1996. Feminist Political Ecology: Global

     Issues and Local Experiences. New York: Zed Books.
Roseberry, William. 1994. “Hegemony and the Language of Contention.” Pp. 355–366 in Everyday Forms
     of State Formation: Revolution and the Negotiation of Rule in Modern Mexico,ed. Gilbert M. Joseph

     and David Nugent. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Royal Society. 2006. Science Communication: Excellence in Science—Survey of Factors Affecting Science
     Communication by Scientists and Engineers. London: Royal Society.
Scott, James C. 1998. Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human Condition Have

     Failed.New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Shanley, Patricia, and Citlalli López. 2009. “Out of the Loop: Why Research Rarely Reaches Policy Mak-
     ers and the Public and What Can Be Done.” Biotropica41, no. 5: 535–544.

Shirk, Jennifer L., Heidi L. Ballard, Candie C. Wilderman, Tina Phillips, Andrea Wiggins, Rebecca
     Jordan, Ellen McCallie, et al. 2012. “Public Participation in Scientific Research: A Framework for
     Deliberate Design.” Ecology and Society 17, no. 2: 29.
Spangenberg, Joachim H. 2011. “Sustainability Science: A Review, an Analysis and Some Empirical Les-

     sons.” Environmental Conservation 38, no. 3: 275–287.
Sultana, Farhana. 2009. “Fluid Lives: Subjectivities, Gender and Water in Rural Bangladesh.” Gender,
     Place and Culture: A Journal of Feminist Geography 16, no. 4: 427–444.
Summerson Carr, E. 2010. “Enactments of Expertise.” Annual Review of Anthropology39: 17–32.

Taddei, Renzo. 2011. “Watered-Down Democratization: Modernization versus Social Participation in
     Water Management in Northeast Brazil.” Agriculture and Human Values 28, no. 1: 109–121.
Tulloch, Ayesha I. T., Hugh P. Possingham, Liana N. Joseph, Judit Szabo, and Tara G. Martin. 2013.

     “Realising the Full Potential of Citizen Science Monitoring Programs.” Biological Conservation 165:
     128–138.
Vetter, Jeremy. 2011. “Introduction: Lay Participation in the History of Scientific Observation.” Science in
     Context 24, no. 2: 127–141.

Vitos, Michalis, Matthias Stevens, Jerome Lewis, and Muki Haklay. 2013. “Community Mapping by
     Non-literate Citizen Scientists in the Rainforest.” SoC Bulletin 46: 3–11.
Weaver, Bruce J. 1996. “‘What to Do with the Mountain People?’: The Darker Side of the Successful

     Campaign to Establish the Great Smoky Mountains National Park.” Pp. 151–175 in TheSymbolic
     Earth: Discourse and Our Creation of the Environment, eds. James G. Cantrill and Christine L.
     Oravec. Lexington: University of Kentucky Press.
Weaver, Thomas, James B. Greenberg, William Alexander, and Anne Browning-Aiken, eds. 2012. Neolib-

     eralism and Commodity Production in Mexico. Boulder: University Press of Colorado.
                                       Transforming Participatory Science into Socioecological Praxis 䡲 27



Welp, Martin, Anne de la Vega-Leinert, Susanna Stoll-Kleeman, and Carlo C. Jaeger. 2006. “Science-
     Based Stakeholder Dialogues: Theories and Tools.” Global Environmental Change 16, no. 2: 170–181.
West, Paige. 2005. “Translation, Value, and Space: Theorizing an Ethnographic and Engaged Environ-

     mental Anthropology.” American Anthropologist107, no. 4: 632–642.
West, Paige. 2010. “Making the Market: Specialty Coffee, Generational Pitches, and Papua New Guinea.”
     Antipode 42, no. 3: 690–718.

Wolf, Eric R. 1982. Europe and the People without History.Berkeley: University of California Press.
Wolf, Eric R. 2001. “Facing Power—Old Insights, New Questions.” Pp. 383–397 in Pathways of Power:
     Building an Anthropology of the Modern World,ed. Eric R. Wolf and Sydel Silverman. Berkeley:

     University of California Press.
Wynne, Brian. 1996. “Misunderstood Misunderstandings: Soca     il Identities and Public Uptake of Science.”
     Pp. 19–46 in Misunderstanding Science? The Public Reconstruction of Science and Technology,ed.
     Alan Irwin and Brian Wynne. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.