Use of Health Information Technology among Racial and Ethnic Underserved Communities











        Use of Health Information Technology

       among Racial and Ethnic Underserved

                                  Communities




by Michael Christopher Gibbons, MD, MPH

Abstract

    This article examines the potential role of health IT in addressing healthcare disparities among racial
and ethnic minority populations. An overview of health IT utilization among healthcare providers notes
certain characteristics that may disproportionately affect minority populations. Current and emerging
health IT use among racial and ethnic minority populations is examined, highlighting areas in which
technology use in these populations differs from that of nonminority populations and emphasizing the
importance of new social media applications in healthcare education and delivery. Following a discussion
of adoption and utilization barriers for providers as well as for patients and caregivers, specific
opportunities to address healthcare disparities through health IT use are identified at the provider,
patient/caregiver, and healthcare system levels. The article identifies several technical, practical, and

human challenges to health IT adoption and stresses the need for the healthcare system to embrace the full
spectrum of emerging health IT opportunities to address healthcare disparities.

Keywords: health information technology, electronic health records

Introduction

    The advances in information technology (IT) that have been transforming our society have
tremendous potential to improve healthcare in areas such as consumer health, clinical care, administrative
and financial transactions, public health, professional education, and biomedical and health services
research. Indeed, it has been suggested that IT must play a central role in the redesign of the healthcare
system if substantial improvement in healthcare quality for all patients is to be achieved. Interest is also
growing in understanding the potential role of health IT in addressing healthcare disparities among racial
and ethnic minority populations.5

    In order to adequately and appropriately evaluate the potential of health IT to address healthcare
disparities, adoption and utilization barriers must be understood. Furthermore, because healthcare is
increasingly being delivered in noninstitutional, ambulatory, and home- and community-based settings,
barriers and opportunities within these differing delivery settings must be identified. Identification of
these barriers and opportunities will enable an evidence-based approach to the design, development, and
deployment of appropriate tools and applications. It will also facilitate targeted, tailored, and even
personalized approaches to health IT development and enable meaningful monitoring and evaluation of
costs, processes, and outcomes.
2                                                               Perspectives in Health Information Management, Winter 2011


Understanding Current Electronic Health Record and Health IT Use


Provider Health IT Utilization
    To date, much of the attention paid to health IT has focused on the role of electronic health records,
health information exchanges, telemedicine, computerized provider order entry (CPOE) systems, e-

prescribing, and electronic radiological systems. While national adoption data are limited for most forms
of health IT, the most recent data for electronic health records (EHRs) indicate that the EHR adoption rate
in U.S. medical offices is 36.1 percent, a 3.2 percent increase since February 2009. Providers use these
EHR systems mostly for electronic notes but also for viewing or ordering labs or x-rays and for e-
prescribing. Several factors tend to be associated with higher EHR adoption rates. These include having a

larger number of physicians in 6 practice, having a higher number of available exam rooms, and having
higher daily patient volumes.

    Data from the 2005 and 2006 National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey (NAMCS) and National
Hospital Ambulatory Medical Care Survey (NHAMCS) indicate that EHR adoption is lower among
providers serving Hispanic or Latino patients who are uninsured or rely on Medicaid. The surveys also
found lower EHR adoption among providers of uninsured non-Hispanic black patients than for providers

of privately insured non-Hispanic white patients. Primary care providers in private solo or small group
practices have the lowest adoption rate (5.7 percent), whereas those in other office settings (including
HMOs, faculty practice plans, and urgent care centers) have the highest adoption rate (38.3 percent). The
adoption rates for hospital outpatient departments exceed the rates for solo and partner practices. Finally,
EHR adoption rates among community health centers are higher than the rates for solo and small group
          7
practices.

Use of Current and Emerging Health IT among Racial and Ethnic Minority Patients and
Caregivers

    Patients and their caregivers have many potential opportunities to utilize technology in the context of
managing their health and healthcare. The Institute of Medicine, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services, and other bodies are increasingly beginning to emphasize that care should not occur just within
face-to face visits but should be provided in a variety of formats, using a range of current and emerging
health IT tools, to increase patient access, enhance patients’ engagement in their care, reengineer patient-

centered c8–10 and foster the continuous healing relationships needed to appropriately manage chronic
illnesses.    Within the healthcare arena, much of the patient-oriented focus has been on the role of
personal health record (PHR) systems. PHRs have been defined as Internet-based tools that may be linked
with existing EHRs or electronic medical records (EMRs) and that allow patients to access, input, change,

coordinate, and control their health information. The major differe11e between a PHR and an EMR or
EHR is that patients cannot access or control the EMR or EHR.

    Although national data regarding PHR adoption rates are limited, a recent national survey 12 the
California Healthcare Foundation found that 7 percent of respondents were using a PHR. Use of PHRs
is higher in the West (11 percent) and higher still in California (15 percent). Most users (64 percent) said
that it enabled them to make sure their health information is accurate, while about 50 percent found it
useful to e-mail providers and renew prescriptions online. More than half of PHR users think that using

a PHR makes them feel as though they know more about their health and about the care their doctor gives
them. Finally, while most PHR users tend to be younger, highly educated, and of higher income, those
with less education and lower incomes and those with chronic illnesses derive the most value and achieve
deeper engagement in the process of managing their health and healthcare.      14

    A recent study of Kaiser Permanente enrollees found significant racial and ethnic disparities among
enrollees who registered to use the PHR available to all Kaiser members. Among African American
members, 30.1 percent registered, compared with 41.7 percent of whites (p < .01). Those with baseline

Internet access were more likely to register, and a significant educational gradient was also observed
(with registration more likely among those of higher educational levels). Interestingly, differences in
education, income, and Internet access did not account for the disparities in PHR registration by race.    15
Use of Health Information Technology among Racial and Ethnic Underserved Communities


    Rates of PHR adoption by consumers and caregivers may not adequately characterize the extent to

which patients and consumers are utilizing health IT tools to support their health and healthcare needs.
Emerging evidence suggests that rapidly growing numbers of patients, caregivers, and consumers are
turning to online and electronic resources largely developed outside of the healthcare establishment for

health16nformation and support. To date, approximately 160 million Americans have used online health
tools. In fact, the average person in the United States now relies on a variety of electronic media and
Internet-based resources to research diseases and treatments and to access general health information and
support, resulting in the Internet’s surpassing physicians as the most popular health resource.      17, 18
                                                                                          19–25
Collectively, these tools have been called consumer health informatics (CHI) tools.            Although the
value of these tools has not been definitively characterized, one-third of online health seekers feel they
have been helped by the information and resources they have found, and early scientific evidence
suggests that select tools may improve certain clinical outcomes in some patients.       26

    National rates of CHI utilization among racial and ethnic minority patients and caregivers have not
been assessed. It is likely, however, that racial and ethnic minorities’ use of CHI tools exhibits at least

some degree of digital disparity, as do general Internet utilization patterns across these populations. For
example, between 2000 and 2010 the proportion of Internet users who are black or Latino has nearly
doubled, increasing from 11 to 21 percent. At the same time, African Americans remain           less likely than

whites to go online. Similarly, African Americans continue to trail whites in broadband use at home and
are less likely than whites to own a desktop computer (51 percent for African Americans vs. 65 percent
for whites). US born Latinos are almost identical to whites in their use of the Internet and home
broadband, yet foreign-born Latinos are much less likely than whites or US born Latinos in Internet
                                                                                          28
utilization (80 percent native-born Hispanic vs. 51 percent foreign-born Hispanic).
    Finally, social media use is emerging as a potent resource among healthcare consumers. In 2004 the

term Web 2.0 wa29introduced to describe this shift in both consumer demand and application
functionality. The main difference between Web 1.0 (the first generation of the Internet) and Web 2.0 is
the level or intensity of interaction that the technology makes possible. Web 1.0 consisted of mostly
unidirectional information seeking, whereas Web 2.0 allows the user to add information or content to the
                                                                             31
Web, thus enabling interaction, information sharing, and collaboration. Increasingly, the terms social
media and social networking are being used to describe Web 2.0 tools and applications.

    Examination of social media utilization patterns by race suggests potential opportunities to help
address healthcare disparities via this form of health IT. Minority Americans are higher utilizers of mobile
Internet access, especially via handheld devices. According to a Pew Research Center study, ―Nearly two-

thirds of African-Americans (64 percent) and Latinos (63 percent) are wireless internet users, and
minority Americans are significantly more likely to own a cell phone than their white counterparts (87
percent of blacks and Hispanics own a cell phone, compared with 80 percent of whites). Additionally,
black and Latino cell phone owners take advantage of a much wider array of their phones’ data functions
                                           32
compared to white cell phone owners.‖

    Social media has entered the mainstream healthcare system in several ways. Entrepreneurs who
understand healthcare trends and consumer demands are leading creative business startups that are
developing health-oriented social networks, health content aggregators, medical and wellness
applications, and tools to enable health-related vertical searches (searches focused on a specific content
      33
area). Online patient communities are rapidly growing through both mainstream social communities and
more recently established condition-specific communities (PatientsLikeMe, QuitNet, CureTogether).
Meanwhile, hospitals and academic medical centers are using social media, with more than 300 YouTube
channels and 500 Twitter accounts now available online. Hospitals are moving from experimentation
                                                                                                          34
(Twitter updates from the OR, Flip videos) to strategic use of social media to recruit new p35ients.
Finally, some online physician-only communities have more than 115,000 members.

    People are clearly drawn to the higher levels of engagement and interactivity possible through the use
of social media and Web 2.0. In addition, the context of social encounters offered by many social media
applications seems to be of particular interest to users. The importance of social context, interactivity, and

engagement among Web 2.0 users suggests the opportunity and potential these tools may offer in helping
to address important issues related to healthcare disparities such as patient activation/engagement, access
4                                                                 Perspectives in Health Information Management, Winter 2011


to care, health education and self-management support, and minority patient recruitment into clinical
trials.


Health IT Adoption Barriers among Minority Populations

Barriers Related to Health IT Design and Development

    Digital disparities exist in the adoption and utilization of various forms of health IT. To
comprehensively understand these disparities, potential barriers to health IT adoption and utilization must
be considered from several perspectives. These include the provider and healthcare system perspective;

the perspective of patients, families, and caregivers; the impact of the technology itself; and finally the
setting or environment (hospital/clinic, home/community, or safety-net organization) in which the
technology is used and the care is delivered and/or received. Barriers, issues, or problems in any one of
these domains could impact health IT adoption, utilization, and ultimately outcomes. If the problems are

of a nature such that one population benefits more than another from the technology, the adoption of
health IT could actually increase or exacerbate existing healthcare disparities or even create new ones.

    How humans interact with devices in challenging environments is the province of human factors
engineering. These interactions are related to the people, tasks, environments, and technologies involved
in the care process, which are often different for racial and ethnic minority patients. Because healthcare
cost-control efforts are pushing more and more care into the home and ambulatory settings, the relative

importance of patient and environmental human factors issues will likely increase. Many environmental
aspects of not only the hospital but also the home and community may be associated with human factors
challenges that may impact the safe, effective, and error-free utilization of health IT. To date, the
literature on healthcare disparities includes little empirical research along these lines. Critical research
needs to be done to precisely characterize the extent, nature, and impact of these issues on healthcare

quality, utilization, outcomes, and disparities.

Provider Adoption and Utilization Barriers
    Several barriers to physician adoption of health IT have been identified in the literature. For example,
                                                                                                           36–38
positive physician attitudes toward health IT and information systems are associated with adoption.         39
Positive attitudes include interest, perceived usefulness, and motivation in working with technology.
The negative impact of health IT on clinical workflows and the absence of technical assistance for office
staff and physicians have also been found to negatively impact physician adoption rates.       40–42The inability

of EHR and health IT systems to communicate with each other (interoperability) has also been identified
as a barrier to provider adoption. Interoperability among IT systems may facilitate provider adoption
because it could potentially reduce rework by care providers as well as improve dissemination of new
medical knowledge among physicians.       43–46Finally, positive communication in which providers share
thoughts, opinions, and information by speech, in writing, or through peer professional or social networks
                                                                       47–49
has been shown to be associated with provider health IT adoption.

Patient and Caregiver Adoption and Utilization Barriers
    Numerous barriers to adoption have been reported among underserved patients and caregivers. One

major barrier for patients, as for clinicians, is the lack of a perceived benefit of health IT. If patients do
not perceive a benefit to be gained from using a given system, they are unlikely to use it, especially when
there is a significant degree of inconvenience in data entry, if the patient is already doing well, or when
there are only a small number of other users. Another barrier is a perception of the health IT creating
                                                                                                                51–
54re work for patients, or patients’ finding it difficult to fit the health IT into their busy everyday lives.
  Lack of trust in the device, technical problems, confusing educational or instructional materials and/or
technology content, limited access to computers or hardware, technology fears/anxiety, and cognitive and
physical disabilities have all been shown to be barriers to health IT utilization and adoption among
                         55-68
vulnerable populations.       The compe69ng responsibility of taking care of a family has been identified as
a barrier for some minority patients. Poor computer knowledge, literacy, and skills are also barriers
Use of Health Information Technology among Racial and Ethnic Underserved Communities


among minority populations.    70–74Lack of cultural relevance as well as privacy and trust concerns all have
been reported as barriers to the use of CHI tools and applications.    75-79


Potential Opportunities for Health IT to Help Address Healthcare Disparities

Provider-Related Opportunities

    Several provider-level determinants of healthcare disparities may be impacted by health IT. For
example, the goal of many provider-oriented health IT tools is to make pertinent patient information
seamlessly and unambiguously available to providers at the point of care. In so doing, these tools can

reduce clinical uncertainty related to unclear or incorrect patient information that may be found in a
handwritten medical record. In the absence of needed information (or in the presence of unclear or
ambiguous data), providers may undervalue patient-specific information while at the same time
overweighting their own clinical beliefs, assumptions, biases, or stereotypes about certain types of
         80
patients. If clear and accurate patient information is presented to the clinician in the EHR, the use of this
information should increase, obviating the need for relying on less-appropriate data. Over time this could
have the cumulative effect of promoting high-quality personalized care and reducing select healthcare
disparities.81

    Electronic health records also provide physicians with information about appropriate treatment
options, thus providing clinical decision support and enabling clinicians to make the best treatment
                                      82
decisions among available options. Health IT tools may also provide clinical decision support by
generating feedback for providers regarding their clinical performance through reminders, quality reports,
or clinical benchmarking. Reminders and quality reports provide feedback to providers about the quality
of care they provide to a particular patient during a clinical encounter or about the care they have
provided patients over a given time. If these reports include specific disparities indicators, this type of

information could help reduce disparities by exposing unrecognized clinical practices that fall short of
accepted standards and guidelines and by highlighting a provider’s performance across all patients. With
this information, providers may then work to reduce identified disparities by focusing on areas that need
improvement.   83

    Health IT, including some EHR systems, can function to connect physicians with other people. Health
IT tools such as e-mail, e-consultation, e-prescribing, and CPOE systems enable providers to connect with
                                 84
other healthcare professionals. These tools may facilitate reductions in healthcare disparities in ways
similar to the potential effects of reminder systems, quality reporting, and benchmarking described above.
They also may provide ready access to needed clinical expertise to facilitate better diagnostic and
therapeutic decisions. Other forms of health IT, including telemedicine, remote monitors and sensors,

patient e-mail, and incre85ingly the Internet and social media, connect providers and healthcare systems to
patients and caregivers. These tools may reduce disparities by being used to provide care, education, or
support to disparity populations and enabling access to care not otherwise available. However, disparities
may actually increase if these tools are used unevenly across populations.     86

    Another way in which health IT tools that connect providers with patients may impact healthcare
disparities is by enabling increased monitoring of important clinical parameters among racial and ethnic

minority patients. Because many patients often poorly self-manage or fail to monitor their conditions,
patient sensor (―smart‖) technology can enable remote monitoring and direct delivery of patient data
(glucose levels, weight, vital signs, falls, psychological or musculoskeletal stress/injury, etc.) to a device
or even to an EHR. These data could facilitate better clinical management and enhance disease control
(blood sugar levels, weight gain/loss), resulting in lower complication rates (blindness, renal failure, limb

loss), delays in disease progression (diabetes, congestive heart failure), and potentially the narrowing of
disparities. These tools may also facilitate stable relationships between patients and providers by enabling
patients to overcome barriers to achieving regular communication, accessing care, or otherwise
maintaining provider relationships. Whether a patient has a regular source of care has been described as a
                                                    87, 88
significant determinant of healthcare disparities.       By improving doctor-patient communication and
enabling more stable therapeutic relationships, these tools may also help promote enhanced patient
engagement in care, facilitate shared decision making, and increase patient-centeredness of care, all of
6                                                                 Perspectives in Health Information Management, Winter 2011


which are recognized as determinants of healthcare disparities and are essential for high-quality
healthcare. 89–95


Patient and Caregiver Opportunities
    Addressing healthcare disparities through patient-oriented health IT was partially addressed in the
discussion above about health IT tools that connect providers to patients and caregivers. In addition,

health IT tools designed primarily for patients (consumer health informatics tools) could, in the future,
become important options to support patient health education. Because of the prevalence of health literacy
challenges, which occur disproportionately among minority populations, many patients appear to lack the
skills necessary to fully understand or comprehend provider instructions, read medication and healthcare
product labels, or adhere to complex self-management regimes.       96, 9Incomplete or partial understanding

of health and healthcare issues may fuel lack of trust in the healthcare system. Mistrust has been linked to
devaluing or disregarding of provider instructions and to patient nonadherence among certain disparity
populations. 98–103Thus, providing culturally, linguistically, and cognitively appropriate and accessible
health education is a necessary part of providing high-quality, patient-centered care. Because of time
constraints imposed on clinicians, however, providing appropriate health education for all who need it is

an increasingly formidable challenge. Health IT may offer significant new promise for addressing
healthcare disparities by improving the availability, appropriateness, and efficacy of patient health
education. 104

    Finally, patient-oriented health IT tools also offer future promise for supporting patient health
behaviors. By enhancing social support and interaction, these tools may improve patient engagement,
particularly among minority populations whose utilization of social media and mobile applications is

significantly higher than that of white populations.

Opportunities at the Healthcare System Level
    Opportunities to address healthcare disparities through health IT at the healthcare system level are
related to the potential of health IT to improve patient-centeredness, timeliness, efficiency, and

effectiveness of healthcare delivery. This is especially true among providers and patients delivering and
receiving care within the nation’s healthcare safety-net system. This system provides the care for many of
the nation’s most vulnerable patients, often under resource limitations not present in other healthcare
systems and facilities. 105

    The ability of health IT to connect patients to providers and healthcare systems may lend itself to
interesting opportunities for providers and healthcare systems to improve care processes and outcomes by
actually learning from large groups of patients. Health-oriented social networking groups, including

PatientsLikeMe and CureTogether, may represent a future for healthcare, medical practice, and medical
research that is radically different from today. Indeed, reports are beginning to emerge regarding what is
increasingly becoming known as ―crowdsourcing.‖ Crowdsourcing is the practice of enabling a
population (crowd) to solve a problem or offer an answer to a particular question.

    Using patient-contributed and patient-controlled data, groups like CureTogether, with more than
15,000 members in 112 countries, who have contributed 1.3 million data points across 625 conditions, are

claiming to have replicated a dozen published disease correlations and have released what they are calling
infographics for multiple diseases. Infographics are essentially scatter plots of treatment effectiveness
versus popularity. These infographics indicate that the most-prescribed treatments are not always the most
effective.106By applying similar approaches to problems related to healthcare disparities (i.e., cultural
competency), providers or healthcare systems could learn vast amounts about the attitudes, beliefs,

preferences, behavioral patterns, and cultural norms among populations of patients for which they are
responsible for providing care. This information could reduce disparities by enabling providers and
healthcare systems to better target, tailor, and even personalize healthcare service delivery in ways not
currently possible.
Use of Health Information Technology among Racial and Ethnic Underserved Communities


Achieving the Potential of Health IT among Vulnerable Populations

    The use of health IT among racial and ethnic minority populations carries significant promise and
potential. Yet realizing the potential will not come without surmounting several significant technical,
practical, and human challenges. In order to measure success or failure, it will be important to conduct
ongoing surveillance and monitoring of national progress. Because of the great diversity in the types of
technologies, types of users, and settings in which health IT may be employed, obtaining accurate

estimates of adoption and utilization will be a significant challenge. The development of the ―meaningful
use‖ criteria and the linking of meaningful use to provider reimbursement will help but will not be
sufficient. As providers meaningfully use health IT, it will be possible to track provider utilization among
participating providers. Additionally, as patients become more involved in accessing, managing, and
using their health information, a need to develop ―meaningful patient use‖ criteria may arise.

    The day may also come when a voluntary process will need to be put into place to certify health IT
devices and applications for cultural, linguistic/literacy, and human factors appropriateness for use among
one or more vulnerable populations. Assuming these challenges can be overcome, the need for new
provider- and patient-oriented health IT tools, devices, interventions, treatments, and educational content
will be ongoing. Currently, most of this developmental work is done outside the formal healthcare

system. Perhaps, then, the most important question regarding the potential of health IT to help address
healthcare disparities is whether or not the healthcare system will embrace the full spectrum of emerging
health IT opportunities and lead the charge toward achieving the goal of a more equitable healthcare
system and a healthy society.





    Michael Christopher Gibbons, MD, MPH, is the associate director of the Johns Hopkins Urban
Health Institute and assistant professor of public health and medicine at the Johns Hopkins Medical
Institutions in Baltimore, MD.
8                                                       Perspectives in Health Information Management, Winter 2011




Notes

    1. Committee on Quality of Health Care in America. Crossing the Quality Chasm.

        Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 2001.
    2. Ibid.
    3. Calman, N., K. Kitson, and D. Hauser. ―Using Information Technology to Improve
        Health Quality and Safety in Community Health Centers.‖ Progress in Community
        Health Partnerships 1, no. 1 (2007): 83–88.
    4. Gibbons, M. C. ―A Historical Overview of Health Disparities and the Potential of eHealth
        Solutions.‖ Journal of Medical Internet Research 7, no. 5 (2005): e50.

    5. Ketcham, J. D., K. E. Lutfey, E. Gerstenberger, C. L. Link, and J. B. McKinlay.
        ―Physician Clinical Information Technology and Health Care Disparities.‖ Medical Care
        Research and Review 66, no. 6 (2009): 658–81.
    6. TriMed Media Group. ―EHR Adoption Rate in U.S. Physician Offices Increases 3.2%
        since 2009.‖ February 18, 2010. Available at
        http://www.healthimaging.com/index.php?option=com_articles&view=article&id=20693

        :ehr-adoption-rate-in-us-physician-offices-increases-32-since-2009.
    7. Hing, E., and C. W. Burt. ―Are There Patient Disparities When Electronic Health
        Records Are Adopted?‖ Journal of Health Care for the Poor and Underserved 20, no. 2
        (2009): 473–88.
    8. Committee on Quality of Health Care in America. Crossing the Quality Chasm.
    9. Roblin, D. W., T. K. Houston, J. J. Allison, P. J. Joski, and E. R. Becker. ―Disparities in
        Use of a Personal Health Record in a Managed Care Organization.‖ Journal of the

        American Medical Informatics Association 16, no. 5 (2009): 683–89.
    10. Pagliari, C., D. Detmer, and P. Singleton. ―Potential of Electronic Personal Health
        Records.‖ BMJ 335, no. 7615 (2007): 330–33.
    11. Roblin, D. W., T. K. Houston, J. J. Allison, P. J. Joski, and E. R. Becker. ―Disparities in
        Use of a Personal Health Record in a Managed Care Organization.‖
    12. Undem, T. National Health IT Consumer Survey. California Healthcare Foundation,
        2010.

    13. Ibid.
    14. Ibid.
    15. Roblin, D. W., T. K. Houston, J. J. Allison, P. J. Joski, and E. R. Becker. ―Disparities in
        Use of a Personal Health Record in a Managed Care Organization.‖
    16. Manhattan Research. Cybercitizen Health v9.0. New York: Manhattan Research, 2010.
    17. Ibid.

    18. Estabrook, L., E. Witt, and L. Rainie. Information Searches That Solve Problems.
        Washington, DC: Pew Research Center, 2007.
    19. Eysenbach, G., J. Powell, M. Englesakis, C. Rizo, and A. Stern. ―Health Related Virtual
        Communities and Electronic Support Groups: Systematic Review of the Effects of Online
        Peer to Peer Interactions.‖ BMJ 328, no. 7449 (2004): 1166.
    20. Eysenbach, G., J. Powell, O. Kuss, and E. R. Sa. ―Empirical Studies Assessing the
        Quality of Health Information for Consumers on the World Wide Web: A Systematic

        Review.‖ JAMA 287, no. 20 (2002): 2691–2700.
Use of Health Information Technology among Racial and Ethnic Underserved Communities

    21. Eysenbach, G., and A. R. Jadad. ―Evidence-Based Patient Choice and Consumer Health
        Informatics in the Internet Age.‖ Journal of Medical Internet Research 3, no. 2 (2001):

        E19.
    22. Eysenbach, G., and T. L. Diepgen. ―The Role of E-health and Consumer Health
        Informatics for Evidence-Based Patient Choice in the 21st Century.‖ Clinics in
        Dermatology 19, no. 1 (2001): 11–17.
    23. Eysenbach, G. ―Consumer Health Informatics.‖ BMJ 320, no. 7251 (2000): 1713–16.
    24. Gibbons, M. C., R. F. Wilson, L. Samal, C. U. Lehman, K. Dickersin, H. P. Lehmann, et

        al. ―Impact of Consumer Health Informatics Applications.‖ Evidence Reports/Technology
        Assessments, no. 188 (2009): 1–546.
    25. Keselman, A., R. Logan, C. A. Smith, G. Leroy, and Q. Zeng-Treitler. ―Developing
        Informatics Tools and Strategies for Consumer-Centered Health Communication.‖
        Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 15, no. 4 (2008): 473–83.
    26. Gibbons, M. C., R. F. Wilson, L. Samal, C. U. Lehman, K. Dickersin, H. P. Lehmann, et
        al. ―Impact of Consumer Health Informatics Applications.‖

    27. Smith, A. Home Broadband 2010. Washington, DC: Pew Research Center, 2010.
    28. Livingston, G. The Latino Digital Divide: The Native Born versus the Foreign Born.
        Washington, DC: Pew Hispanic Center, 2010.
    29. O’Reilly, T. ―What Is Web 2.0: Design Patterns and Business Models for the Next
        Generation of Software.‖ O’Reilly Media Inc., September 30, 2005. Available at
        http://oreilly.com/web2/archive/what-is-web-20.html.
    30. Van De Belt, T. H., L. J. Engelen, S. A. Berben, and L. Schoonhoven. ―Definition of

        Health 2.0 and Medicine 2.0: A Systematic Review.‖ Journal of Medical Internet
        Research 12, no. 2 (2010): e18.
    31. Ibid.
    32. Smith, A. Mobile Access 2010. Washington, DC: Pew Research Center, 2010, p. 3.
    33. Sharp, J. ―Social Media in Health Care: Barriers and Future Trends.‖
        iHealthBeat/California Healthcare Foundation, May 6, 2010. Available at

        http://www.ihealthbeat.org/perspectives/2010/social-media-in-health-care-barriers-and-
        future-trends.aspx.
    34. Ibid.
    35. Sermo. 2010. Available at http://www.sermo.com/.
    36. Castillo, V. H., A. I. Martinez-Garcia, and J. R. Pulido. ―A Knowledge-Based Taxonomy
        of Critical Factors for Adopting Electronic Health Record Systems by Physicians: A
        Systematic Literature Review.‖ BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making 10

        (2010): 60.
    37. Ford, E. W., N. Menachemi, and M. T. Phillips. ―Predicting the Adoption of Electronic
        Health Records by Physicians: When Will Health Care Be Paperless?‖ Journal of the
        American Medical Informatics Association 13, no. 1 (2006): 106–12.
    38. Ash, J. S., and D. W. Bates. ―Factors and Forces Affecting EHR System Adoption:
        Report of a 2004 ACMI Discussion.‖ Journal of the American Medical Informatics
        Association 12, no. 1 (2005): 8–12.

    39. Ibid.
    40. Ammenwerth, E., C. Iller, and C. Mahler. ―IT-Adoption and the Interaction of Task,
        Technology and Individuals: A Fit Framework and a Case Study.‖ BMC Medical
        Informatics and Decision Making 6 (2006): 3.
    41. Joos, D., Q. Chen, J. Jirjis, and K. B. Johnson. ―An Electronic Medical Record in Primary
        Care: Impact on Satisfaction, Work Efficiency and Clinic Processes.‖ AMIA Annual

        Symposium Proceedings 2006: 394–98.
10                                                       Perspectives in Health Information Management, Winter 2011

    42. Saleem, J. J., E. S. Patterson, L. Militello, M. L. Render, G. Orshansky, and S. M. Asch.
        ―Exploring Barriers and Facilitators to the Use of Computerized Clinical Reminders.‖

        Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 12, no. 4 (2005): 438–47.
    43. Rosenbloom, S. T., J. Grande, A. Geissbuhler, and R. A. Miller. ―Experience in
        Implementing Inpatient Clinical Note Capture via a Provider Order Entry System.‖
        Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 11, no. 4 (2004): 310–15.
    44. Halamka, J., M. Aranow, C. Ascenzo, D. W. Bates, K. Berry, G. Debor, et al. ―E-
        Prescribing Collaboration in Massachusetts: Early Experiences from Regional

        Prescribing Projects.‖ Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 13, no. 3
        (2006): 239–44.
    45. Payne, T. H., M. Perkins, R. Kalus, and D. Reilly. ―The Transition to Electronic
        Documentation on a Teaching Hospital Medical Service.‖ AMIA Annual Symposium
        Proceedings 2006: 629–33.
    46. Leung, G. M., P. L. Yu, I. O. Wong, J. M. Johnston, and K. Y. Tin. ―Incentives and
        Barriers That Influence Clinical Computerization in Hong Kong: A Population-Based

        Physician Survey.‖ Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 10, no. 2
        (2003): 201–12.
    47. Castillo, V. H., A. I. Martinez-Garcia, and J. R. Pulido. ―A Knowledge-Based Taxonomy
        of Critical Factors for Adopting Electronic Health Record Systems by Physicians: A
        Systematic Literature Review.‖
    48. Jerome, R. N., N. B. Giuse, S. T. Rosenbloom, and P. G. Arbogast. ―Exploring Clinician
        Adoption of a Novel Evidence Request Feature in an Electronic Medical Record

        System.‖ Journal of the Medical Library Association 96, no. 1 (2008): 34–41.
    49. Desroches, C. M., E. G. Campbell, S. R. Rao, K. Donelan, T. G. Ferris, A. Jha, et al.
        ―Electronic Health Records in Ambulatory Care—a National Survey of Physicians.‖ New
        England Journal of Medicine 359, no. 1 (2008): 50–60.
    50. Jimison, H., P. Gorman, S. Woods, P. Nygren, M. Walker, S. Norris, et al. ―Barriers and
        Drivers of Health Information Technology Use for the Elderly, Chronically Ill, and

        Underserved.‖ Evidence Reports/Technology Assessments, no. 175 (2008): 1–1422.
    51. Ibid.
    52. Anhoj, J., and L. Nielsen. ―Quantitative and Qualitative Usage Data of an Internet-Based
        Asthma Monitoring Tool.‖ Journal of Medical Internet Research 6, no. 3 (2004): e23.
    53. Ralston, J. D., D. Revere, L. S. Robins, and H. I. Goldberg. ―Patients’ Experience with a
        Diabetes Support Programme Based on an Interactive Electronic Medical Record:
        Qualitative Study.‖ BMJ 328, no. 7449 (2004): 1159.

    54. van’t Riet, A., M. Berg, F. Hiddema, and K. Sol. ―Meeting Patients’ Needs with Patient
        Information Systems: Potential Benefits of Qualitative Research Methods.‖ International
        Journal of Medical Informatics 64, no. 1 (2001): 1–14.
    55. Anhoj, J., and L. Nielsen. ―Quantitative and Qualitative Usage Data of an Internet-Based
        Asthma Monitoring Tool.‖
    56. Cruz-Correia, R., J. Fonseca, L. Lima, L. Araujo, L. Delgado, M. G. Castel-Branco, et al.
        ―Web-Based or Paper-Based Self-Management Tools for Asthma—Patients’ Opinions

        and Quality of Data in a Randomized Crossover Study.‖ Studies in Health Technology
        and Informatics 127 (2007): 178–89.
    57. Cavan, D. A., J. Everett, S. Plougmann, and O. K. Hejlesen. ―Use of the Internet to
        Optimize Self-Management of Type 1 Diabetes: Preliminary Experience with DiasNet.‖
        Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare 9, suppl. 1 (2003): S50–S52.
    58. van den Brink, J. L., P. W. Moorman, M. F. de Boer, J. F. Pruyn, C. D. Verwoerd, J. H.

        van Bemmel. ―Involving the Patient: A Prospective Study on Use, Appreciation and
Use of Health Information Technology among Racial and Ethnic Underserved Communities

        Effectiveness of an Information System in Head and Neck Cancer Care.‖ International
        Journal of Medical Informatics 74, no. 10 (2005): 839–49.

    59. McDaniel, A. M., S. Hutchison, G. R. Casper, R. T. Ford, R. Stratton, and M. Rembusch.
        ―Usability Testing and Outcomes of an Interactive Computer Program to Promote
        Smoking Cessation in Low Income Women.‖ Proceedings of the AMIA Symposium 2002:
        509–13.
    60. Earnest, M. A., S. E. Ross, L. Wittevrongel, L. A. Moore, and C. T. Lin. ―Use of a
        Patient-Accessible Electronic Medical Record in a Practice for Congestive Heart Failure:

        Patient and Physician Experiences.‖ Journal of the American Medical Informatics
        Association 11, no. 5 (2004): 410–17.
    61. Kaufman, D. R., J. Starren, V. L. Patel, P. C. Morin, C. Hilliman, J. Pevzner, et al. ―A
        Cognitive Framework for Understanding Barriers to the Productive Use of a Diabetes
        Home Telemedicine System.‖ AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings 2003: 356–60.
    62. Ralston, J. D., D. Revere, L. S. Robins, and H. I. Goldberg. ―Patients’ Experience with a
        Diabetes Support Programme Based on an Interactive Electronic Medical Record:

        Qualitative Study.‖
    63. Ma, C., J. Warren, P. Phillips, and J. Stanek. ―Empowering Patients with Essential
        Information and Communication Support in the Context of Diabetes.‖ International
        Journal of Medical Informatics 75, no. 8 (2006): 577–96.
    64. Finkelstein, J., G. Hripcsak, and M. R. Cabrera. ―Patients’ Acceptance of Internet-Based
        Home Asthma Telemonitoring.‖ Proceedings of the AMIA Symposium 1998: 336–40.
    65. Lober, W. B., B. Zierler, A. Herbaugh, S. E. Shinstrom, A. Stolyar, E. H. Kim, et al.

        ―Barriers to the Use of a Personal Health Record by an Elderly Population.‖ AMIA
        Annual Symposium Proceedings 2006: 514–18.
    66. Ibid.
    67. Ibid.
    68. Jimison, H., P. Gorman, S. Woods, P. Nygren, M. Walker, S. Norris, et al. ―Barriers and
        Drivers of Health Information Technology Use for the Elderly, Chronically Ill, and

        Underserved.‖
    69. Kontos, E. Z., G. G. Bennett, and K. Viswanath. ―Barriers and Facilitators to Home
        Computer and Internet Use among Urban Novice Computer Users of Low
        Socioeconomic Position.‖ Journal of Medical Internet Research 9, no. 4 (2007): e31.
    70. Ibid.
    71. Lenhart, A., J. Horrigan, L. Rainie, K. Allen, A. Boyce, and E. O’Grady. The Ever-
        Shifting Internet Population: A New Look at Internet Access and the Digital Divide.

        Washington, DC: Pew Internet and American Life Project, 2003.
    72. Simon, C., L. Acheson, C. Burant, N. Gerson, S. Schramm, S. Lewis, et al. ―Patient
        Interest in Recording Family Histories of Cancer via the Internet.‖ Genetics in Medicine
        10, no. 12 (2008): 895–902.
    73. McTavish, F. M., D. H. Gustafson, B. H. Owens, M. Wise, J. O. Taylor, F. M. Apantaku,
        et al. ―CHESS: An Interactive Computer System for Women with Breast Cancer Piloted
        with an Under-Served Population.‖ Proceedings of the Annual Symposium on Computer

        Application in Medical Care 1994: 599–603.
    74. Weber, B., J. Fritze, B. Schneider, D. Simminger, and K. Maurer. ―Computerized Self-
        Assessment in Psychiatric In-Patients: Acceptability, Feasibility and Influence of
        Computer Attitude.‖ Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica 98, no. 2 (1998): 140–45.
    75. Wangberg, S. C. ―An Internet-Based Diabetes Self-Care Intervention Tailored to Self-
        Efficacy.‖ Health Education Research 23, no. 1 (2008): 170–79.

    76. Shaw, B. R., L. L. DuBenske, J. Y. Han, L. Cofta-Woerpel, N. Bush, D. H. Gustafson, et
        al. ―Antecedent Characteristics of Online Cancer Information Seeking among Rural
12                                                       Perspectives in Health Information Management, Winter 2011

        Breast Cancer Patients: An Application of the Cognitive-Social Health Information

        Processing (C-SHIP) Model.‖ Journal of Health Communication 13, no. 4 (2008): 389–
        408.
    77. Ferney, S. L., and A. L. Marshall. ―Website Physical Activity Interventions: Preferences
        of Potential Users.‖ Health Education Research 21, no. 4 (2006): 560–66.
    78. Simon, C., L. Acheson, C. Burant, N. Gerson, S. Schramm, S. Lewis, et al. ―Patient
        Interest in Recording Family Histories of Cancer via the Internet.‖

    79. Keselman, A., L. Slaughter, C. A. Smith, H. Kim, G. Divita, A. Browne, et al. ―Towards
        Consumer-Friendly PHRs: Patients’ Experience with Reviewing Their Health Records.‖
        AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings 2007: 399–403.
    80. Ketcham, J. D., K. E. Lutfey, E. Gerstenberger, C. L. Link, and J. B. McKinlay.
        ―Physician Clinical Information Technology and Health Care Disparities.‖
    81. Ibid.

    82. Ibid.
    83. Ibid.
    84. Ibid.
    85. Gibbons, M. C., R. F. Wilson, L. Samal, C. U. Lehman, K. Dickersin, H. P. Lehmann, et
        al. ―Impact of Consumer Health Informatics Applications.‖
    86. Ketcham, J. D., K. E. Lutfey, E. Gerstenberger, C. L. Link, and J. B. McKinlay.

        ―Physician Clinical Information Technology and Health Care Disparities.‖
    87. Carpenter, W. R., P. A. Godley, J. A. Clark, J. A. Talcott, T. Finnegan, M. Mishel, et al.
        ―Racial Differences in Trust and Regular Source of Patient Care and the Implications for
        Prostate Cancer Screening Use.‖ Cancer 115, no. 21 (2009): 5048–59.
    88. Shi, L., and G. D. Stevens. ―Vulnerability and Unmet Health Care Needs: The Influence
        of Multiple Risk Factors.‖ Journal of General Internal Medicine 20, no. 2 (2005): 148–

        54.
    89. Alegria, M., W. Sribney, D. Perez, M. Laderman, and K. Keefe. ―The Role of Patient
        Activation on Patient-Provider Communication and Quality of Care for US and Foreign
        Born Latino Patients.‖ Journal of General Internal Medicine 24, suppl. 3 (2009): 534–41.
    90. Ratanawongsa, N., B. J. Zikmund-Fisher, M. P. Couper, J. Van Hoewyk, and N. R. Powe.
        ―Race, Ethnicity, and Shared Decision Making for Hyperlipidemia and Hypertension

        Treatment: The DECISIONS Survey.‖ Medical Decision Making 30, no. 5 (suppl.)
        (2010): 65S–76S.
    91. Peek, M. E., A. Odoms-Young, M. T. Quinn, R. Gorawara-Bhat, S. C. Wilson, and M. H.
        Chin. ―Race and Shared Decision-Making: Perspectives of African-Americans with
        Diabetes.‖ Social Science and Medicine 71, no. 1 (2010): 1–9.
    92. Peek, M. E., S. C. Wilson, R. Gorawara-Bhat, A. Odoms-Young, M. T. Quinn, and M. H.

        Chin. ―Barriers and Facilitators to Shared Decision-Making among African-Americans
        with Diabetes.‖ Journal of General Internal Medicine 24, no. 10 (2009): 1135–39.
    93. Epstein, R. M., K. Fiscella, C. S. Lesser, and K. C. Stange. ―Why the Nation Needs a
        Policy Push on Patient-Centered Health Care.‖ Health Affairs (Millwood) 29, no. 8
        (2010): 1489–95.
    94. Institute of Medicine Forum on the Science of Health Care Quality Improvement and

        Implementation, Institute of Medicine Roundtable on Health Disparities, and Institute of
        Medicine Roundtable on Health Literacy. Toward Health Equity and Patient-
        Centeredness: Integrating Health Literacy, Disparities Reduction, and Quality
        Improvement: Workshop Summary. Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2009.
Use of Health Information Technology among Racial and Ethnic Underserved Communities

    95. Mandl, K. D., I. S. Kohane, and A. M. Brandt. ―Electronic Patient-Physician
        Communication: Problems and Promise.‖ Annals of Internal Medicine 129, no. 6 (1998):

        495–500.
    96. Wolf, M. S., E. A. Wilson, D. N. Rapp, K. R. Waite, M. V. Bocchini, T. C. Davis, et al.
        ―Literacy and Learning in Health Care.‖ Pediatrics 124, suppl. 3 (2009): S275–S281.
    97. Rothman, R. L., H. S. Yin, S. Mulvaney, J. P. Co, C. Homer, and C. Lannon. ―Health
        Literacy and Quality: Focus on Chronic Illness Care and Patient Safety.‖ Pediatrics 124,
        suppl. 3 (2009): S315–S326.

    98. Carpenter, W. R., P. A. Godley, J. A. Clark, J. A. Talcott, T. Finnegan, M. Mishel, et al.
        ―Racial Differences in Trust and Regular Source of Patient Care and the Implications for
        Prostate Cancer Screening Use.‖
    99. LaVeist, T. A., L. A. Isaac, and K. P. Williams. ―Mistrust of Health Care Organizations
        Is Associated with Underutilization of Health Services.‖ Health Servcies Research 44,
        no. 6 (2009): 2093–2105.
    100.   Nguyen, G. C., T. A. LaVeist, M. L. Harris, L. W. Datta, T. M. Bayless, and S. R.

        Brant. ―Patient Trust-in-Physician and Race Are Predictors of Adherence to Medical
        Management in Inflammatory Bowel Disease.‖ Inflammatory Bowel Diseases 15, no. 8
        (2009): 1233–39.
    101.   Arora, N. K., and D. H. Gustafson. ―Perceived Helpfulness of Physicians’
        Communication Behavior and Breast Cancer Patients’ Level of Trust over Time.‖
        Journal of General Internal Medicine 24, no. 2 (2009): 252–55.
    102.   Kennedy, B. R., C. C. Mathis, and A. K. Woods. ―African Americans and Their

        Distrust of the Health Care System: Healthcare for Diverse Populations.‖ Journal of
        Cultural Diversity 14, no. 2 (2007): 56–60.
    103.   Boulware, L. E., L. A. Cooper, L. E. Ratner, T. A. LaVeist, and N. R. Powe. ―Race
        and Trust in the Health Care System.‖ Public Health Reports 118, no. 4 (2003): 358–65.
    104.   Gibbons, M. C. ―A Historical Overview of Health Disparities and the Potential of
        eHealth Solutions.‖

    105.   Gibbons, M. C., and C. R. Casale. ―Reducing Disparities in Health Care Quality: The
        Role of Health IT in Underresourced Settings.‖ Medical Care Research and Review 67,
        no. 5 (suppl.) (2010): 155S–165S.
    106.   Carmichael, A. CureTogether Blog. 2010. Available at http://curetogether.com/blog/.