Accountability in Research, 18:132–147, 2011
Copyright © Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
ISSN: 0898-9621 print / 1545-5815 online
DOI: 10.1080/08989621.2011.575032




Voting with their Mice:

Personal Genome Testing


and the “Participatory Turn”

in Disease Research



Barbara Prainsack, Ph.D.

King’s College London, Centre for Biomedicine and Society, London, England, UK

While the availability of genome tests on the internet has given rise to heated debates
about the likely impact on personal genome information on test-takers, on insurance,
and on healthcare systems, in this article I argue that a more tangible effect of per-
sonal genomics is that it has started to change how participation in disease research
is conceived and enacted. I examine three models of research participation that per-
sonal genomics customers are encouraged to engage in. I conclude with an evaluation
of the pitfalls and beneﬁts of “crowdsourcing” genetic disease research in the context of

personal genomics.

Keywords: disease research, Internet, personal genomics


PERSONAL GENOMICS AND THE “CROWDSOURCING” OF GENETIC

DISEASE RESEARCH

Since autumn 2007, commercial companies have been offering individual
genetic risk calculations over the internet. For fees starting at a few hundred

dollars, these companies look at up to over a million points (single nucleotide
polymorphisms or SNP) across the genome to assess their customers’ indi-
vidual genetic predispositions to various diseases, traits, carrier status, drug

responses, and genetic ancestry. Tests looking at either ancestry or health
information, respectively, are available for even less. Customers go online to
order a “spit kit,” send a saliva sample, or check swab back to the company, and
receive a password enabling them to access their personalized risk information
                                                      1
online a few weeks later. The Icelandic company deCODE ,and 23andMe in
Mountain View, CA, were the ﬁrst to offer these services direct-to-consumer


Address correspondence to Barbara Prainsack, Ph.D., King’s College London, Strand
Campus, Centre for Biomedicine and Society, London, WC2R 2LS, UK. E-mail:
Barbara.prainsack@kcl.ac.uk
                                                           Voting with Their Mice133


(DTC). Navigenics (Foster City, CA) joined a few weeks later, and Pathway
Genomics in San Diego became the fourth Personal Genomics (PG) company

to offer SNP-based genome-wide risk predictions to consumers online in sum-
mer 2009. With the exception of Navigenics, which restricts the scope of their
tests to “important health conditions” (Navigenics, 2009), all PG companies

offer “personalized” risk calculations for a wide range of phenotypes and traits
(ranging from diabetes via alcohol ﬂush syndrome to eye color), as well as

results of SNP-based analysis of carrier status and drug response.
    PG arguably differs from classical medical genetic testing in four main

ways: First, instead of looking at the presence or absence of a particular muta-
tion, it creates a large dataset which can be reanalyzed whenever new research

ﬁndings (suggesting new correlations between a genetic marker and a pheno-
type) become available. Second, in contrast to classical medical genetic testing,
which regularly takes place in a clinical context, PG does either not involve

medical professionals at all, or it involves them only very marginally at the
stage of ordering the test.2 Test results are available to the tested individu-

als on the internet. Thus, traditional modes of evaluating the utility of genetic
tests, which revolve around clinical utility, stand in an inevitable tension with

alternative understandings of utility in the context of PG. Third, as colleagues
and I have argued elsewhere (Prainsack et al., 2008), the data provided by PG

companies in some instances conveys health relevant and non-health relevant
information at the same time (e.g., phenotypes such as “alcohol ﬂush reac-
tion”). Fourth, PG focuses on complex diseases and traits, which are caused

by the interplay of various genetic and nongenetic factors. Many of these fac-
tors are yet unknown or unexplored. Thus, the predictive value of the genetic

markers tested by consumer genomics companies is typically very small.
    While the emergence of PG was accompanied by concern within the clini-

cal and bioethical communities from the beginning (Howard and Borry, 2008;
Feero et al., 2008; Hunter et al., 2008; Kraft and Hunter, 2009; Caulﬁeld, 2009;
Khoury, McBride et al., 2009), those concerns largely pertained to risks to indi-

viduals receiving PG test results. Discussions revolved around the presumed
difﬁculties of recipients of PG information to understand the results of PG tests

due to their low predictive value and their probabilistic nature (Janssens et al.,
2008; Platt, 2009; Khoury, Berg et al., 2009); about PG tests therefore caus-

ing needless anxieties, or, conversely, groundless relief of health fears (Hunter
et al., 2008); about the allegedly low clinical utility of the tests (Khoury,

McBride et al., 2009; Foster et al., 2009; Platt, 2009); about data privacy
(Gurwitz and Bregman-Eschet, 2009; Aldhous and Reilly, 2009), and about
implications for the health care system (Khoury, McBride et al., 2009; McGuire

and Burke, 2008) as well as for insurance (Altman, 2009). From the—
admittedly very limited—empirical evidence available so far, it seems unlikely

that risks pertaining to causing needless anxieties or groundless relief of
health fears will materialize (for a contrasting assessment, see Stemerding
134   B. Prainsack


      et al., 2010; for research into attitudes of publics towards PG services, see
      McGuire et al., 2009; Makeeva et al., 2009; Cherkas et al., 2010; for research

      on experiences of “early adopters,” see McGowan et al., 2010; Kolor et al., 2009;
      McBride et al., 2009).
          An issue that has received very little attention until recently, however, is

      the way in which PG draws consumers into participating in disease research.
      This is the case despite the fact that the blogosphere has been fraught for a

      long time with discussions about how PG companies’ primary goal could be the
      establishment of a database which could function as an important resource for

      genetic disease research (e.g., MacArthur, 2008). These discussions predated
      the declaration of the “Do-it-yourself Revolution in Disease Research” (Avey,

      2009) by 23andMe in July 2009, when the company called upon actual and
      potential consumers to “pledge allegiance” to a particular disease (out of a pre-
      determined list of 10 conditions) for which they would help support research.

      The company also offered a signiﬁcantly cheaper version of their genome test
      ($99) to customers who agreed to upload phenotypic and lifestyle information
             3
      as well. Even those not willing to purchase a PG test were encouraged to ﬁll
      in surveys on their experiences with headaches, for example. In addition, the

      company teamed up with patient organizations such as PatientsLikeMe to fos-
      ter research into Parkinson’s Disease (PatientsLikeMe, n.d.). In June 2010, the

      company published the ﬁrst fruits of their research on genetic associations for
      common traits in PLoS Genetics (Erikson et al., 2010).
          23andMe were not alone in their quest to extend their activities into

      the realm of research: Navigenics joined forces with Scripps, Microsoft
      Health Vault,and   Affymetrix, to explore how consumers use PG information

      (Navigenics, 2009; MacArthur, 2009), and Seattle-based TruGenetics offered
      free PG tests if test-takers were “willing to contribute your questionnaire
                                                            TM
      responses and genetic information to the TruGenetics     research database” in
      spring 2009 (TruGenetics, 2009a; Vorhaus, 2009). Although TruGenetics was
      “not accepting any new registrations as we are working on developing a new

      strategy” (TruGenetics, 2009b) only a few months after their launch, it seems
      that attracting consumers to contribute information (genetic and otherwise) to

      a commercial research database in return for personalized risk information is
      considered an attractive business model by some.

          This trend of “crowdsourcing” of genetics research (Barry, 2009) clearly
      raises questions regarding the accountability of this kind of research. The

      accountability of PG companies as research-facilitating entities regarding, for
      example, research ethics, ownership of data, possible rights infringements
      of participants, is not explicitly regulated, and there is no legal precedence

      yet. A way to understanding these challenges is to examine what forms of
      participation the “crowdsourcing” of genetic disease research in the context

      of PG suggests to its target groups. The emergence of PG was, and still
      is, accompanied by enthusiastic rhetoric of citizen empowerment and the
                                                          Voting with Their Mice135


“democratization” of the genome. Leroy Hood, in a 2009 article in Newsweek,
hailed the advent of what is called “P4 medicine: predictive, personalised,
preventive, participatory” (Hood, 2009). But if we are indeed witnessing a “par-

ticipatory turn” in disease research, what does it look like, and in what ways
could it affect how disease research is carried out? The following section will

discuss three models of participation which I argue serve as models for how
research participation in PG is dominantly perceived. These models are cru-

cially different from conceptions of research participation as we know it, and it
is no coincidence that all three of them are situated in the realm of consumer
culture (Lemke, 2004). 4



NAPSTER, IKEA, & CO.: MODELS OF PARTICIPATION


The Napster Model of Participation: Early Adopters of PG

    Social science research on experiences of “early adopters” with PG
(McGowan et al., 2010; Kolor et al., 2009; McBride et al., 2009) suggests that

intellectual curiosity plays a crucial role in early adopters’ uptake of PG. PG
consumers’ blogs suggest that this curiosity is less oriented towards utilizing

health information in any particular way but that it is instead much more
vaguely targeted at knowing more about oneself in general terms. Following

Hacking’s observation (2009), studying one’s genome online and ﬁlling in
lifestyle questionnaires for research has much of the same quality as other
modes of “identity making.”

    Another incentive for some early adopters—and one which has not been
prominently addressed in research with early adopters so far—seems to be

their interest in the technical side of PG. Especially in the very early days
of PG, between November 2007 and spring 2008, many early adopters’ blog
posts were concerned with improving algorithms, graphical solutions, and raw

data analysis (the free SNP interpretation tool SNPedia is a by-product of
these efforts; see Cariaso, 2007, and also Ledford, 2010). Right from the start,

23andMe seized the opportunity to turn their web-o-phile early customers—
who were either important enough to get the test for free, or they paid just

under $1,000 for a PG test—into allies and co-developers. When bloggers criti-
cized features on 23andMe’s Web site, or commented on the scientiﬁc accuracy
of a particular scientiﬁc study on which the company based its disease risk

calculations, 23andMe responded on their own weblog, adapted its features,
defended, dismissed, or adjusted the science behind their disease risk and

ancestry calculations, etc. 23andMe is continuously shaping its scope and focus
according to the actions, hopes, fears, and expectations of their users. The

introduction of their research arm only marked the moment when the company
rendered the involvement of consumers explicit and visible: Now potential and
actual consumers could vote on the companies’ Web site for diseases which
136   B. Prainsack


      the company would then prioritize in their research lobby efforts, and they
      were encouraged to contribute their own DNA and lifestyle information for

      that purpose. Participants were consumers and providers of information at
      the same time (the overlap of “producing” and consuming in one actor is also

      captured in the notion of “prosuming,” see Lim and Nekmat, 2008). In addition,
      individuals who had already purchased a PG test could conﬁgure their online

      proﬁle to share different levels of DNA information with other users.
          This model of participation bears strong resemblances to some aspects of

      the online platform Napster (www.napster.com), which launched in 1998 to
      allow users share music ﬁles with each other in “real time.” As Robinson and
      Halle (2002) state, “Napster’s free software turned every user’s machine into

      both a client and a server.” Similar to the web site of 23andMe, early users
      played crucial roles as co-designer of the service and shapers of its content.
                                                                              5
      Despite differences between Napster and 23andMe in other respects,        early
      adopters assumed an important role in challenging the previous dominance of

      elites—the music industry and the medical profession, respectively—as gate
      keepers to data (music ﬁles and genetic information).

          As Robinson and Halle (2002) note, in the case of Napster, the concept
      of horizontal ﬁle sharing spurred heated controversy which lead to Napster

      being taken to court by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA),
      in conjunction with a number of high proﬁle musicians, in 1999. Although
      Napster declared bankruptcy in 2002 and reinvented itself as a fee-based ser-

      vice, it had fundamentally changed the music industry (Wilson, 2009). Music
      sampling—that is, the downloading music without paying for ﬁles—has since

      been reframed as a “right” of consumers which helps them to make informed
      choices about what to spend money on (Robinson and Halle, 2002). This

      “right-to-data/information-based” discourse is characteristic for the approach
      of some of the most powerful actors in Web-based social media (Auletta, 2009;

      Prainsack, 2010). It is also manifest in the arguments employed by early
      adopters in the PG ﬁeld. In the words of an early adopter:


            It is a source of great frustration and sorrow for me to see the avalanche
        of regulatory reaction that purports to ‘protect me’ and results in thwarting me!
        Regulation certainly is warranted, but it needs to have clearer goals and incor-

        porate . . . the perspective of those who want to have this testing done. (Personal
        e-mail communication, September 2009)

      Like in the case of Napster, participation in PG on the side of early adopters

      consisted of participating in shaping both the form and content of PG services.
      Perhaps more importantly, however, early adopters enabled PG companies to

      challenge the established system of professional medical gate keepers similar
      to how Napster had done it in the music industry: The ﬁrst step entailed the

      offering of a perfectly legal service on the internet (access to individual genetic
      risk data) while at the same time providing infrastructures that facilitate, or
                                                          Voting with Their Mice137


even encourage, activities that challenge traditional hierarchies and patterns
of practice. These practices sometimes border to the illegal (e.g., unauthorized
DNA submission for analysis, or submitting DNA of minors, see Gurwitz et al.,

2009; by-passing medical professionals in countries where this is illegal in case
of genetic tests; etc.).In a second step, the early adopters do the legwork

for the industry: They engage in all these behaviors at signiﬁcant numbers,
thereby creating a fait accompli that regulators and other authorities then

have to accommodate.


The Supermarket Model of Participation: How “Regular”

    Consumers Participate in the “DIY Revolution
    in Disease Research”

    Now that PG services have been around for over two years, and 23andMe

had declared to have over 50,000 genomes in their database (23andMe, 2011),
most new customers do no longer ﬁt the label of “early adopters.” 23andMe’s
price cut for PG tests from just under $1,000 to $399 in July 2008 (with even

cheaper, $99 “slimmed down” genome tests being offered a year later) probably
marks the beginning of a wider uptake of PG testing beyond the early adopter

group, whose interest in the service was, as argued above, often signiﬁcantly
shaped by technical or professional interests (McGowan et al., 2010), and some-

times by the desire to be part of something new. Early adopters had either
received a PG test for free because they belonged to a privileged group—such
as attendants of the World Economic Forum in Davos in 2008, or of the New

York fashion week in the same year, where tests were given out for free—or
they had been wealthy enough to afford the $999 testing fee.

    “Regular” consumers, however, that is, those who were not early adopters
but joined after the price cut in July 2008, in combination with those who
are targeted by the PG industry right now, can be assumed to be motivated

by different reasons than the early adopter group. Because no study so far
has examined motivations for testing either within a group representative of

PG consumers, or within a representative sample of the general population,
no robust data on consumers’ motivations is available. Learning what moti-

vates individuals to undergo PG testing, however, is important to understand
in what way they may be willing to participate in research as well.
    In our own survey of 4,050 British adults (aged 17–91, µ = 56.4) who are

volunteers in the Twins U.K. database, only a small minority (5%) said that
they would be “very” or “fairly” likely to order a PG test if it cost £250 (this

ﬁgure roughly corresponded with the price of a PG test at currency exchange
rate at the time of the survey in autumn 2008. See Cherkas et al., 2010). When

asked about their likelihood to undergo PG testing if the test were free, how-
ever, 48% were “very” (30%) or “fairly” (18%) likely to do it. A further 22%
said they were undecided. Out of those who said they were either “very” or
138   B. Prainsack


      “fairly” likely to undergo PG testing if it was free, 93% would do it because a
      PG test would encourage them to adopt a healthier lifestyle if found to be at

      higher genetic risk of a disease; 86% wanted to learn more about themselves;
      80% wanted to convey genetic risk information to their children, and 79% felt
      that if they had their PG test results, their doctor can monitor their health

      more closely. Finally, 50% thought that PG testing could assist them in ﬁnan-
      cial planning in the future (Cherkas et al., 2010). (Because all participants

      in the survey were volunteers in the Twins U.K. database, it can be assumed
      that this population group has higher levels of awareness and reﬂexivity about

      the somatic dimension of relatedness, although from our experience with this
      group we have no indication that they are more genetically literate than the

      general population [Prainsack and Spector, 2006].) Only 13% of survey respon-
      dents said they had been aware of PG testing, and nobody had taken one at
      the time of the survey.

          Based on assessments of PG consumer activists, genetic genealogy
      activists, and observers, a signiﬁcant proportion of actual PG consumers

      ﬂocked to 23andMe not because of an interest in health, but because of the per-
      ception that 23andMe’s ancestry test provided good value for money compared

      to other genetic ancestry tests at the market. As one client of both 23andMe
      and deCODEme told me, although he was relieved to learn that his test results

      for the disease parts did not bear any unpleasant surprises, “I’m not inter-
      ested in the health stuff” (personal e-mail communication with the author). It
      is arguably also for this reason that 23andMe split their services in separate

      health and ancestry tests in November 2009 (23andMe, 2009b), to be able to
      provide improved services to those solely interested in ancestry at a price that
                           7
      was still competitive.
          But in what way do “regular” consumers—those who are not early adopters

      or those who have a primarily professional interest in PG testing (McGowan
      et al., 2010)—participate in disease research via 23andMe and other PG com-
      panies? As argued earlier, in contrast to early adopters, regular consumers

      play a much less important role in shaping the format and content of PG ser-
      vices; they are less likely to blog about their experiences, less likely to report

      feedback to companies, and less likely to participate in ﬁnding solutions for
      technological problems. In short, their participation is less active than in the

      early adopters group. Aaron Panofsky (personal e-mail communication with
      the author) compared the participation of consumers in PG with supermar-

      ket consumers holding loyalty cards, where they get discounts in return for
      granting the company access to marketing relevant information. I would like to
      extend this analogy further, as customers’ participation in PG resembles con-

      sumption in a supermarket in additional ways: Like in a supermarket, where
      customers know that every good needs to be paid for, while many are less aware

      of what they give to the company for free (information on buying patterns,
      addresses and phone numbers, etc.), PG customers are very aware that they
                                                          Voting with Their Mice139


need to pay for the goods they will receive, but they may be less aware of the
downsides. For example, their information can be passed on to law enforce-

ment authorities; the uploading of lifestyle and phenotypic information to
the company’s Web site for research purposes renders individuals more easily
identiﬁable—even if the company does not link them to account information—

and will be passed on to for-proﬁt research institutions, etc. Moreover, like a
middle- or upper-range supermarket chain that seeks to obtain loyal customers

by providing a feel-good atmosphere (music, light, scents), PG company’s Web
sites are designed to make the customer enjoy the experience and feel good

about herself. Perhaps we can even go as far as saying that the customer is
made feel as if she belonged to something bigger than herself. She is meant to

feel that she belongs to a “revolution.”


The IKEA Model of Participation: The Rhetoric of PG Service

    Providers

    When 23andMe announced their “Do-it-yourself Revolution in Disease
Research” in July 2009, interested individuals could participate in several

different ways. First, they could contribute to the “revolution” by ﬁlling in ques-
tionnaires but refrain from purchasing a PG test. Second, they could purchase

the research edition of 23andMe’s PG test which did not disclose ancestry infor-
mation and committed test-takers to upload additional information that could
be used for research purposes. Third, they could purchase the regular test

and volunteer additional research-relevant information in addition to that.
Fourth, they could refrain from participating in the “revolution” altogether

and purchasing the regular test. Also regular test-users, however, by signing
the consent form, allow 23andMe to use their genetic data for research (but

in contrast to those purchasing the cheaper “research” edition they were not
obliged to submit phenotypic and lifestyle data as well). Thus, similar to pur-

chasing a piece of furniture at the furniture chain IKEA, customers were given
the feeling that they were building something themselves. IKEA keeps cost low
by providing most of their items in DIY-packages for customers to assemble at

home. One of the secrets of success of the IKEA model, however, is that the DIY
aspect is not embedded in a rhetoric of cost-control but instead in a discourse

of home-making, individual agency, choice, and ultimately, happiness. A trip to
IKEA does not—like a trip to a discount supermarket in suburbia—bear the

connotation of social stigma and bleakness, but on the contrary, it seeks to be
a shopping experience for the entire family (Hopﬁnger and Walla, 2009) and

a positive lifestyle choice. Consequently, assembling an IKEA table does not
make one a loser, but it shows that one cares—for one’s family or friends, one’s
“home” 9 (a very prominent word in IKEA’s advertisement campaigns), or sim-

ply for style. Nevertheless, what one actually does by choosing and assembling
an IKEA table is not making a table from scratch, but instead choosing from
140   B. Prainsack

      a predetermined range of elements in a predetermined range of colors and

      sizes and assemble the different parts to a piece of furniture that one shares in
      common with thousands of other IKEA customers. Similarly, a participant in

      23andMe’s “DIY revolution in disease research” does not have any real capac-
      ity for agenda-setting, for putting forward values and ideas, beyond the ability
      to cast a vote to range of predetermined options pertaining to disease types

      that the company then promises to prioritize, or to choosing a mode and scope
      of data contribution (see above). Moreover, the goals and the thrust of the rev-

      olution have already been set by the company: it is to foster and facilitate
      research into a range of common diseases by means of collecting genetic, phe-
      notypic, and lifestyle information which can be passed on to public and private

      research. Another underlying norm that is not at the disposal of the partic-
      ipant in the “revolution” is that 23andMe’s emphasis on individual’s rights

      to their genetic information connotes a duty to use this information wisely to
      adopt a healthier lifestyle. Thus, the participatory turn in medicine is clearly
      also indicative of an ongoing individualization of responsibility in health care

      (Rose, 1996, 1999, 2006; Prainsack, 2011). The more knowledge we can obtain,
      the more we will be expected to obtain, and to pay for (Prainsack, 2009).

         The founders of 23andMe seemed to be fully aware of the fact that rather
      than facilitating a genuine bottom-up, or “grass root,” movement to change
      health care, what they were doing instead was to encourage others to help

      them materialize their own dream of a very speciﬁc form of changing health
      care by targeting disease research. They expressed their gratitude to their

      fellow “revolutionaries” in a way that seems ill-suited for alleged health-
      guerilla ﬁghters: “We are incredibly grateful to everyone who participated
      in the Revolution so far. Thank you!” (23andMe, 2009a. See also Tutton and

      Prainsack, in press).



      CONCLUSION: POTENTIALS AND PITFALLS OF PG AS A DRIVER

      OF DISEASE RESEARCH

      The PG disease research model could offer some tangible beneﬁts to disease

      research. First and foremost, the recruitment costs—logistical, ﬁnancial, and
      otherwise—would be low: Given that 23andMe already hold genome and other

      information of over 50,000 individuals, then they are gate keepers to a pool
      of willing volunteers who have already demonstrated that they are inter-
      ested in genetics research. Moreover, many of them can be assumed to have a

      clear interest in health. Furthermore, PG test-takers are internet-savvy, hold
      online accounts and e-mail addresses, and would therefore be very easy to

      contact whenever needed. Given their interest in genetics research, it can be
      assumed that at least some PG test-takers would be happy to provide addi-
      tional information on phenotypic lifestyle information and possibly also on
                                                          Voting with Their Mice141


drug-response. Research studies indicate that people’s willingness to donate
biological material and information has been found to be relatively high if
donors are properly informed about the ways in which their data will be used,

and risks to conﬁdentiality and privacy are adequately addressed, and/or if
an ethics committee has approved the research protocols (Pulley et al., 2008;

Johnsson et al., 2008; Goldman et al., 2008; Kettis-Lindblad et al., 2006;
Wendler, 2006; Hoeyer, 2004; Wong et al., 2004); and the goal of the research

is perceived as improving health and not proﬁt-making primarily (Jack and
Womack, 2003; Stegmayr and Asplund, 2002). It can be expected that the will-
ingness to participate in research studies would be even higher among PG

test-takers, because for them, participation in research studies would not pose
any considerable additional burdens on individuals in terms of time, logistics,

or pain: Such additional commitments would typically be relatively small as
the company already holds their genome information (and in the cases of cus-
tomers who purchased the $99 research edition test, or ﬁlled in additional

questionnaires, also other kinds of information) (Wendler, 2006; Wong et al.,
2004). In addition, as Kaufman et al.’s (2008) research suggests, willingness

to participate tends to be higher when research ﬁndings are communicated
back to participants. However, this would be a radical departure from common

practices in biobank-based research (Tutton and Prainsack, 2010).
    This model, however, also raises a number of questions. In contrast to
a situation where phenotypes used in genetic research are obtained from,

or speciﬁed in, a clinical context, the PG disease research model would rely
on participants’ self-reporting in questionnaires (MacArthur, 2008). The clas-

siﬁcation of phenotypes is a notorious problem in genetic disease research,
and it could be exacerbated in some respects by the reliance on participants’

own assessments. In addition, whether the model of attracting consumers to
contribute information to a commercial research database in return for per-
sonalized risk information can succeed as a business model will depend on

whether these databases manage to attract a critical mass of participants.
This is a particularly difﬁcult challenge in research into complex diseases

with frequencies of approximately one percent in the general population
(MacArthur, 2009).
    For participants in such, the PG disease research model might seem

riskier than participating in conventional publicly or privately funded clinical
research as the accountability of PG companies is often unclear (see Duncan,

2010). Who, for example, provides scientiﬁc and ethical scrutiny of research
study designs? While this problem could be solved by selling participants’ data

only to research institutions which have state-of-the art ethics review proce-
dures in place, it would be more difﬁcult to hold companies accountable for
these than it is typically the case with “traditional” research institutions and

organizations. And although there are legal provisions for what happens to
data stored at a company in case it goes bankrupt, to what extent these rules
142   B. Prainsack


      would be applied to genetic and other information stored in PG companies’

      databases is unclear (Vorhaus and Moore, 2009), because there has not yet
      been a precedent. The transnational nature of PG testing, where companies
      provide services from one country to consumers in many other countries,

      complicates this picture further.
          In sum, the heated discussion about the potential risks to people who

      receive PG test results arguably distracts from a potentially much more
      impactful development, namely, the way that participation in disease research

      is conceived and enacted. The emphasis on the rights of research partic-
      ipants to “their” genetic information is likely to inﬂuence what research

      participants—both in the realm of publicly and privately funded research—
      expect to receive as a return on their investment. As a result, those interested

      in participating in disease research could be more inclined to volunteer for a
      project which conveys ﬁndings to participants, regardless of the clinical util-

      ity of the information, and regardless of the quality of the research endeavor
      in other respects. If PG companies will indeed become providers of resources

      for genetic disease research, this will also have an impact on the population
      groups studied, exacerbating existing ethnic (Need and Goldstein, 2009) and

      socioeconomic biases.


      ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


      I  am   grateful  to  Mathieu    Albert,  Jeantine   Lunshof,  Gísli  Pálsson,

      David Gurwitz, and the anonymous reviewers for Accountability in Research,
      for very helpful comments on this manuscript.



      NOTES

      1.  DeCODE, the provider of the deCODEme PG service, declared bankruptcy in
      November 2009. It maintained operations at the time of writing (December 2010).

      2.  In response to recent efforts on the side of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
      (FDA) to regulate the PG market, Pathway Genomics stopped offering their tests
      DTC in July 2010, until all issues with the FDA are resolved. Their customers
      must now order the test kit through their doctor. Also deCODEme has offered their
      PG-tests through doctors in parallel to maintaining their DTC-branch since spring
      2010. Counsyl (www.counsyl.com), which focuses on carrier testing, and DNAdirect
      (www.dnadirect.com) are two examples of companies which had offered their services
      DTC initially and have now moved over to encouraging individuals to order through

      their physician. The marketing of their tests continues to target potential consumers
      directly (e.g., see https://www.counsyl.com/order/). 23andMe continues to sell their tests
      only DTC.

      3.  This is how 23andMe’s Web site, titled The 23andMe Research Revolution, commu-
      nicates this objective to potential participants: “Genetic data is only half of the puzzle.
      Participants pledge to take online surveys designed to uncover correlations at the
      genetic level. The surveys are easy, informative and invaluable to research” (23andMe,
      2009a).
                                                                Voting with Their Mice  143


4.  This section draws upon the main sources: (1) an analysis of texts and documents
(including PG service Web sites, news items, online discussion groups, consumer, and

genomics science blogs) obtained from daily internet searches with the key words “per-
sonal genomics,” “GWAS,” “23andMe,” “deCODEme,” and “Navigenics,” from 30 October
2007 to November 2009 (via the Google Alerts tool: http://www.google.com/alerts); (2)
an analysis of the representation of PG companies in the scholarly literature and in
conference presentations on PG from November 2007 to December 2010; and (3) com-

munication with members of user groups of PG companies (July 2009 to December
2009).

5.   Just to name one important difference in another respect, Napster is organized
around ﬁle sharing primarily, while in the case of 23andMe, sharing is encouraged
and endorsed in a much broader sense: sharing of research efforts (and beneﬁts),
sharing of the genome information itself (see also the Genomes Unzipped initiative

[http://www.genomesunzipped.org/] as another manifestation of this notion), sharing
of thoughts and ﬁndings on chat sites, etc.

6.   Yates (2010) argues that 23andMe actively “promotes” the violation of a clause
of their own terms of service, namely, that test results may not be used “to diag-
nose, cure, treat, mitigate, or prevent a disease or other impairment or condition or to
ascertain your health” (https://www.23andme.com/about/tos/?version=1.1), by encour-
aging customers—e.g., via Twitter (www.twitter.com)—to show their test results to their

treating physicians in order to “enlighten” them.
7.  At the same time, however, can attracting customers who are solely interested in

genetic ancestry information to taking PG tests bring them closer to thinking about
health implications as well when they share proﬁles with genetic relatives who are
predisposed to certain conditions or phenotypes. I thank Jeantine Lunshof for alerting
me to this aspect.

8.  Under the headline “23andMe Sponsored Research,” the Informed Consent form of
23andMe states: “We will analyze your genetic and other voluntarily contributed per-

sonal information as part of our scientiﬁc research with the purpose of advancing the
ﬁeld of genetics and human health; your account information will never be associated
with this research. We may also analyze your genetic and other contributed personal
information for the purpose of reviewing, improving, and expanding our features and

services. We may ask you questions and you may choose to give us information about
yourself through surveys or other features on our website. Contributed personal infor-
mation might include age, sex, geographic ancestry, attitudes and health conditions
you have experienced. Providing such contributed personal information is entirely vol-
untary and is not required as part of your use of this Service. And under ‘Collaborative

Research,’ potential customers are informed that 23andMe may enter into partner-
ships with other investigators and organizations—non-proﬁt and/or commercial—that
conduct scientiﬁc research” (23andMe, 2009c).

9.   Interestingly, a similar mobilization of the notion of “home” (folkehemmet,t he
nation’s home) is used in Swedish discussions of biobanks (Pálsson, 2007). I am grateful
to Gísli Pálsson for alerting me to this parallel.





REFERENCES

23andMe. (2009a). The 23andMe Research Revolution. Available at https://www.

    23andme.com/researchrevolution/. Last accessed 1 December 2009.
23andMe. (2009b). Get Just the Information You Want: 23andMe To Offer Separate

    Health and Ancestry Editions. (13 November). Available at http://spittoon.23
144   B. Prainsack


          andme.com/2009/11/13/get-just-the-information-you-want-23andme-to-offer-separ

          ate-health-and-ancestry-editions/#more-5333. Last accessed 17 October 2010.
      23andMe.    (2009c). Consent   and   Legal  Agreement.   Available  at  https://www.

          23andme.com/about/consent/. Last accessed 6 December 2009. [The document was
          revised slightly after the publication of 23andMe-driven research in PLoS Genetics
          in June 2010]

      23andMe. (2010). 23andMe and a new paradigm for research. Spittoon (22
          June). Available at http://spittoon.23andme.com/2010/06/22/23andme-and-a-new-
          paradigm-for-research. Last accessed 21 April 2011.

      Aldhous, P. and Reilly, M. (2009). How my genome was hacked. New Scientist, 201:6–9.

      Altman, R. B. (2009). Direct-to-consumer genetic testing: Failure is not an option.
          Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 86:15–17.

      Auletta, K. (2009). Googled. The End of the World As We Know It. London: Virgin Books.

      Avey, L. (2009). Introducing a Do-It-Yourself Revolution in Disease Research. Spittoon
          (7 July). Available at http://spittoon.23andme.com/2009/07/07/introducing-a-do-it-
          yourself-revolution-in-disease-research/. Last accessed 17 October 2010.

      Barry, P. (2009). Seeking genetic fate. Science News, 176:1.

      Cariaso, M. (2007). SNPedia: A Wiki for Personal Genomics. Bio-ITWorld.com.
          Available at http://www.bio-itworld.com/issues/2007/dec-jan/inside-the-box-snped

          ia/. Last accessed 17 October 2010.
      Caulﬁeld, T. (2009). Direct-to-consumer genetics and health policy: A worst-case

          scenario? American Journal of Bioethics, 9:48–50.

      Cherkas, L. F., Harris, J. M., Levinson, E., Spector, T. D., and Prainsack, B. (2010).
          A survey of U.K. public interest in Internet-based personal genome testing. PLoS
          ONE, 5:el3473.

      Duncan, D. E. (2010). Personalized Health Manifesto: An old-fashioned call to
          arms and action plan for a new age of health care. Available at http://www.
          davidewingduncan.com/media/Personalized-Health-Manifesto.pdf. Last accessed

          17 October 2010.
      Eriksson, N., Macpherson, J. M., Tung, J. Y., Hon, L. S., Naughton, B., Saxonov, S.,

          Avey, L., Wojcicki, A., Pe’er, I., and Mountain, J. (2010). Web-based, participant-
          driven studies yield novel genetic associations for common traits. PLoS Genetics,
          6:e1000993.

      Feero, W. G., Guttmacher, A. E., and Collins, F. S. (2008). The genome gets personal—
          almost. Journal of the American Medical Association, 299:1351–1352.

      Foster, M. W., Mulvihill, J. J., and Sharp, R. R. (2009). Evaluating the utility of personal
          genomic information. Genetics in Medicine, 11:570–574.

      Goldman, R. E., Kingdon, C., Wasser, J., Clark, M. A.., Goldberg, R., Papandonatos,
          G. D., Hawrot, E., and Koren, G. (2008). Rhode Islanders’ attitudes towards the

          development of a statewide genetic biobank. Personalized Medicine, 5:339–359.
      Gurwitz, D. and Bregman-Eschet, Y. (2009). Personal genomics services: Whose

          genomes? European Journal of Human Genetics, 17:883–889.
      Gurwitz, D., Fortier, I., Lunshof, J. E., and Knoppers, B. M. (2009). Research ethics:

          Children and population biobanks. Science, 325:818–819.

      Hacking,   I. (2009).  Current   Controversies:  Ian   Hacking.  “What    will com-
          mercial   genome   reading—from    cheap   23andMe    to  costly  but  complete
          Knome—do to middle-class conceptions of personal identity?” Available at
                                                                Voting with Their Mice  145


    http://onthehuman.org/2009/03/current-controversies-ian-hacking/. Last accessed

    17 October 2010.
Hoeyer, K. (2004). Informed consent and biobanks: A population-based study of atti-

    tudes towards tissue donation for genetic research. Scandinavian Journal of Public
    Health, 32:224–229.

Hood, L. (2009). A doctor’s vision of the future of medicine. Newsweek, 13 July. Available
    at http://www.newsweek.com/id/204227. Last accessed 17 October 2010.

Hopﬁnger, H. and Walla, J. (2009). Ein Möbelhaus als urbane Destination? [A furniture
    store as urban destination?] Standort, 33:40–46 (in German).

Howard, H. C. and Borry, P. (2008). Direct-to-consumer genetic testing: More questions
    than beneﬁts? Personalized Medicine, 5:317–320.

Hunter, D. J., Khoury, M. J., and Drazen, J. M. (2008). Letting the genome out of the
    bottle—Will we get our wish? New England Journal of Medicine, 358:105–107.

Jack, A. L. and Womack, C. (2003). Why surgical patients do not donate tissue for
    commercial research: A review of records. British Medical Journal, 327:262.

Janssens, A. C. J. W., Gwinn, M., Bradley, L. A., Oostra, B. A., van Duijn, C. M.,
    and Khoury, M. J. (2008). A critical appraisal of the scientiﬁc basis of commercial

    genomic proﬁles used to assess health risks and personalize health interventions.
    The American Journal of Human Genetics, 82:593–599.

Johnsson, L., Hansson, M. G., Eriksson, S., and Helgesson, G. (2008). Patients’ refusal
    to consent to storage and use of samples in Swedish biobanks: Cross sectional
    study. British Journal of Medicine, 337:224–226.

Kaufman, D., Murphy, J., Scott, J., and Hudson, K. (2008). Subjects matter: A survey
    of public opinions about a large genetic cohort study. Genetics in Medicine, 10:831–
    839.

Kettis-Lindblad, A., Ring, L., Viberth, E., and Hansson, M. G. (2006). Genetic research
    and donation of tissue samples to biobanks. What do potential sample donors in

    the Swedish general public think? European Journal of Public Health, 16:433–440.

Khoury, M. J., Berg, A., Coates, R., Evans, J., Teutsch, S. M., and Bradley, L. A. (2009).
    The evidence dilemma in genomic medicine. Health Affairs, 27:1600–1611.

Khoury, M. J., McBride, C. M., Schully, S. D., Ioannidis, J. P. A., Feero, W. G.,
    Janssens, C. J. W., Gwinn, M., et al. (2009). The scientiﬁc foundation for per-
    sonal genomics: Recommendations from a National Institutes of Health-Centers for
    Disease Control and Prevention Multidisciplinary Workshop. Genetics in Medicine,

    11:559–567.
Kolor, K., Liu, T., St. Pierre, J., and Khoury, M. J. (2008). Health care provider and

    consumer awareness, perceptions, and use of direct-to-consumer personal genomic
    tests. Genetics in Medicine, 11:595.

Kraft, P. and Hunter, D. J. (2009). Genetic risk prediction: Are we there yet? New
    England Journal of Medicine, 360:1701–1703.

Ledford, H. (2010). Garage biotech: Life hackers. Amateur hobbyists are creating home-
    brew molecular-biology labs, but can they ferment a revolution? Nature, 467:650–
    652.

Lemke, T. (2004). Disposition and determinism: Genetic diagnostics in risk society.
    Sociological Review, 52:550–566.

Lim, S. S. and Nekmat, E. (2008). Learning through ‘prosuming’: Insights from media
    literacy programmes in Asia. Science, Technology, and Society, 13:259–278.
146   B. Prainsack


      MacArthur, D. (2008). Cheap personal genomics: the death-knell for the industry?

          10 September. Available at http://scienceblogs.com/geneticfuture/2008/09/cheap_
          personal_genomics_the_de.php. Last accessed 17 October 2010.

      MacArthur,    D.  (2009).  Enrollment    in  Navigenics-Scripps    study  disappoint-
          ing.  Genetic   Future   blog.  20  February.   Available  at  http://scienceblogs.
          com/geneticfuture/2009/02/enrollment_in_navigenics-scrip.php.     Last   accessed
          17 October 2010.

      Makeeva, O. A., Markova, V. V., and Puzyrev, V. P. (2009). Public interest and expecta-
          tions concerning commercial genotyping and genetic risk assessment. Personalized

          Medicine, 6:329–341.
      McBride, C. M., Alford, S. H., Reid, R. J., Larson, E. B., Baxevanis, A. D., and Brody, L.

          C. (2009). Characteristics of users of online personalized genomic risk assessments:
          Implications for physician-patient interactions. Genetics in Medicine, 11:582–587.

      McGowan, M., Fishman, J. R., and Lambrix, M. A. (2010). Personal genomics and indi-
          vidual identities: Motivations and moral imperatives of early users. New Genetics
          and Society, 29:261–290.

      McGuire, A. L. and Burke, W. (2009). An unwelcome side effect of direct-to-consumer
          personal genome testing: Raiding the medical commons. Journal of the American

          Medical Association, 300:2669–2671.
      McGuire, A. L., Diaz, C. M., Wang, T., and Hilsenbeck, S. G. (2009). Social networkers’

          attitudes toward direct-to-consumer personal genome testing. American Journal of
          Bioethics, 9:3–10.

      Navigenics. (2009). Personalized Genetic Testing. Available at http://www.navigen
          ics.com/partners/scripps/. Last accessed 1 December 2009. [The initiative has now
          stopped accepting new participants].

      Need, A. C. and Goldstein, D. B. (2009). Next generation disparities in human genomics:
          Concerns and remedies. Trends in Genetics, 25:489–494.

      Pálsson, G. (2007). Anthropology and the New Genetics. Cambridge: Cambridge
          University Press.

      PatientsLikeMe. n.d. Innovative research model gives people with Parkinson’s access to
          their own DNA. Available at http://www.patientslikeme.com/partners/1-23-and-me.

          Last accessed 17 October 2010.
      Platt, D. (2009). When consumers get their genomes. Personalized Medicine, 6:669–679.

      Prainsack,   B.  (2009). The   participatory  turn  in  medicine:   Which   letter  in

          the   alphabet?  Genomics    Law   Report.  4   November.   Available   at  http://
          www.genomicslawreport.com/index.php/2009/11/04/the-participatory-turn-in-medi
          cine-which-letter-in-the-alphabet/. Last accessed 17 October 2010.

      Prainsack, B. (2011). Labouring towards self-fulﬁllment: Personal genomics and the
          ‘participatory turn.’ Critical Public Health, in press.

      Prainsack, B. and Spector, T. D. (2006). Twins: A cloning experience. Social Science and
          Medicine, 63:2739–2752.

      Prainsack, B., Reardon, J, Hindmarsh, R., Gottweis, H., Naue, U., and Lunshof, J.
          (2008). Misdirected precaution. Nature, 456:34–35.

      Pulley, J. M., Brace, M. M., Bernard, G. R., and Masys, D. R. (2008). Attitudes and
          perceptions of patients towards methods of establishing a DNA biobank. Cell Tissue

          Bank, 9:55–56.
                                                              Voting with Their Mice 147


Robinson, L. and Halle, D. (2002). Digitization, the Internet, and the arts: eBay,

    Napster, SAG, and e-Books. Qualitative Sociology, 25:359–383.

Rose, N. (1996). Inventing Our Selves: Psychology, Power, and Personhood. Cambridge:
    Cambridge University Press.

Rose, N. (1999). Powers of Freedom: Reframing Political Thought. Cambridge:
    Cambridge University Press.

Rose, N. (2006). The Politics of Life Itself: Biomedicine, Power and Subjectivity in the
    Twenty-First Century. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Stegmayr, B. and Asplund, K. (2002). Informed consent for genetic research on blood
    stored for more than a decade: A population based study. British Medical Journal,
    325:634–635.

Stemerding, D., Swierstra, T., and Boenink, M. (2010). Exploring the interaction
    between technology and morality in the ﬁeld of genetic susceptibility testing: A

    scenario study. Futures, 42:1133–1145.

TruGenetics. (20TMa). Terms & Conditions for Genome Scanning Provided by
    TruGenetics    . Available at http://www.trugenetics.com/about/terms.htm. Last
    accessed 1 December 2009.

TruGenetics. (2009b). Available at http://www.trugenetics.com/register/index.htm. Last
    accessed 1 December 2009.

Tutton, R. and Prainsack, B. (in press). Enterprising or Altruistic Selves? Making Up
    Research Subjects in Genetics Research. Sociology of Health and Illnoss, in press.

Vorhaus, D. (2010). Genomic research goes DTC. Genomics Law Report.9.J       ul
    Available  at   http://www.genomicslawreport.com/index.php/2009/07/09/genomic-

    research-goes-dtc/. Last accessed 17 October 2010.

Vorhaus, D. and Moore, L. (2009). What happens if a DTC genomics com-
    pany goes belly up? Genomics Law Report. 18 September. Available at
    http://www.genomicslawreport.com/index.php/2009/09/18/what-happens-if-a-dtc-g
    enomics-company-goes-belly-up/. Last accessed 17 October 2010.

Wendler, D. (2006). One-time general consent for research on biological samples. British
    Medical Journal, 332:544–547.

Wilson, J. (2009). It’s just not rock’n’roll. Engineering and Technology, 4:32–33.

Wong, M. L., Chia, K. S., Yam, W. M., Teodoro, G. R., and Lau, K. W. (2004). Willingness
    to donate blood samples for genetic research: A survey from a community in

    Singapore. Clinical Genetics, 65:45–51.

Yates, A. (2010). 23andMe Contract in Bad Faith. Think Gene blog.1      8M .
    Original post at http://www.thinkgene.com/23andme-contract-in-bad-faith/, last
    accessed 24 March 2010, was removed recently but is referenced and summarized
    here at http://thegenesherpa.blogspot.com/2010/05/breaking-23andmes-terms-of-
    service-not.html. Last accessed 17 October 2010.
Copyright of Accountability in Research: Policies & Quality Assurance is the property of Taylor & Francis Ltd

and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright
holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.